<TITLE>What Does America Want From China? Debating Washington’s Strategy—and the Endgame of Competition</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2024-11-09</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.foreignaffairs.com/responses/what-does-america-want-china-matt-pottinger-rush-doshi</URL>
<AUTHOR>Rush Doshi; Jessica Chen Weiss and James B. Steinberg; Paul Heer; Matt Pottinger and Mike Gallagher</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
This Foreign Affairs article discusses the Biden administration's China strategy, contrasting it with the approach advocated by Pottinger and Gallagher.
-  The article criticizes Pottinger and Gallagher's proposal for a confrontational approach, arguing it risks escalation and disregards China's current economic and technological strength.
-  The Biden administration, according to the article, prioritizes managing competition, maintaining US leadership, and securing Indo-Pacific freedom from hegemony.
-  This strategy focuses on revitalizing American strength through domestic investment and alliances, while blunting Chinese actions undermining US interests.
-  The article highlights a key difference between the China challenge and the Cold War: China's significant economic and technological strength compared to the Soviet Union and its deeper integration into the global economy.
-  The authors' desired outcome—a liberalized China—is deemed unrealistic.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- It is in the interest of both Beijing and Washington to reduce the risk of war and cooperate on key issues of mutual concern, such as climate change, public health, and the management of potentially destabilizing new technologies.
- Xi’s summit with Biden in California last fall was a step in the right direction, resulting in efforts to curb China’s fentanyl-related exports and the restoration of military-to-military communications to reduce the risk of an unintended crisis.
- The closing session of the National People’s Congress at the Great Hall of the People in Beijing, March 2024 Tingshu Wang / Reuters Even when direct diplomacy fails to resolve key issues, Washington’s openness to engage demonstrates to the world that the United States is acting responsibly.
- Moreover, such engagements provide opportunities to press the Chinese government to change its harmful policies, including support for Russia’s war in Ukraine and other threatening actions.
- Even as the United States works to counter Chinese cyberattacks, information operations, and unfair economic practices, it should also welcome Chinese tourists, businesspeople, and students.

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
The Biden Plan Rush Doshi In “No Substitute for Victory” (May/June 2024), Matt Pottinger and Mike Gallagher raise important concerns about the Biden administration’s China policy.

But their analysis misses the mark.

Their review of key episodes in the administration’s China policy is inaccurate, and they propose steps that the administration is already taking.

But above all, they make a bad bet: they contend that the United States should forget about managing competition, embrace confrontation without limits, and then wait for the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) to collapse.

This approach risks runaway escalation and could force a moment of reckoning before the United States has taken the very steps the authors recommend to strengthen its defense industrial base and improve its competitive position.

Such a strategy would also mean losing support from U.S.

allies and partners, who would see it as irresponsible.

The authors argue that their approach will work against China because it worked against the Soviet Union.

But the Biden administration recognizes that this contest is different from that one.

Its strategy, most recently articulated by National Security Adviser Jake Sullivan in a speech this past January, is founded on realistic assumptions about the capacity of the United States to shape China’s political system.

It focuses not on the kind of bilateral relationship Washington wants with Beijing nor on the kind of government Americans want China to have but on straightforward and long-standing U.S.

objectives: keeping the Indo-Pacific free from hegemony, sustaining American economic and technological leadership, and supporting regional democracies.

It seeks to revitalize the sources of American strength by investing at home and aligning with allies and partners abroad.

From that foundation, the United States can compete intensely by blunting Chinese activities that undermine U.S.

interests and building a coalition of forces that will help the United States secure its priorities—all while managing the risks of escalation.

A BAD BET One can share many of Pottinger and Gallagher’s assumptions and yet reach different conclusions on overall strategy.

The Biden administration ’s National Security Strategy recognizes China as the only state with the intent to reshape the international order and the economic, diplomatic, military, and technological power to do so.

The administration takes seriously China’s efforts to surpass the United States in technology, increase the world’s dependence on China’s supply chains, ramp up regional military operations, and align more closely with Iran, North Korea, and Russia.

But the administration does not share the authors’ assumption that the contest with China can end as decisively and neatly as the Cold War did.

Although Pottinger and Gallagher are careful not to call for forceful regime change, they define victory as “a China that is able to chart its own course free from communist dictatorship.” A China that resembles Taiwan politically is “the only workable destination,” they write.

If Beijing concluded that the United States sought total victory, it would have little reason to exercise restraint.

But betting on a great power’s collapse or liberalization is unwise.

Despite its challenges, China is the first U.S.

competitor in a century to surpass 60 percent of U.S.

GDP.

The country boasts considerably greater industrial and technological strength than the Soviet Union did and is deeply enmeshed in the global economy.

It cannot be wished away.

Ironically, the authors resurrect the end goal of the engagement era: a more liberal China.

They hope that this time, a vague toughness will succeed where commercial and people-to-people ties fell short.

But if engagement risked complacency, their approach risks escalation.

An explicit policy of seeking the end of CCP rule would turn the U.S.-Chinese rivalry into an existential one for China’s leadership.

If Beijing concluded that the United States sought total victory, it would have little reason to exercise restraint.

American objectives do not require China’s political transformation, and there is no guarantee that the end of communist rule would produce a more restrained China.

The end of communist Russia , after all, eventually gave way to Putin’s Russia.

DIPLOMACY, NOT CAPITULATION Because they are betting on China’s collapse, the authors conclude that “the United States shouldn’t manage the competition with China; it should win it.” But the notion that two nuclear-armed strategic competitors should not try to manage their rivalry is unusual even among today’s China hawks and was uncommon in the days of U.S.

diplomat George Kennan and U.S.

President Ronald Reagan that the authors praise.

That is because efforts to manage competition make the United States more competitive.

Such actions show the American public and U.S.

allies and partners that the United States is a responsible actor and that they can confidently buy into Washington’s strategy.

Excessively confrontational positions, in contrast, leave the United States standing alone with fewer tools.

Beijing understands that, which is why it always tries to blame tensions on Washington.

Pottinger and Gallagher’s approach would play into Beijing’s designs.

Managing the competition is unlikely to achieve the kind of strategic reassurance with China that resolves fundamental disagreements.

But Washington should have greater confidence in what can be called “tactical reassurance” that addresses specific issues.

Better communication about what Washington is doing—and not doing—on issues ranging from technology to Taiwan can discourage dangerously fatalistic thinking from a paranoid great power whose dark view of the United States could get even darker.

Making clear that Washington’s goals are not limitless but tied to specific interests reduces the risk of runaway escalation.

That requires face-to-face meetings so that misperceptions can be ironed out quickly, competitive steps by the United States can be explained directly, and both sides can find off-ramps.

Far from capitulation, this is basic diplomacy.

It complements intense competition by making it less risky and more sustainable.

Pottinger and Gallagher argue that any such efforts should be taken from a strong U.S.

position and should be a process, not an end goal.

They are right.

But that, in fact, describes the very approach that the Biden administration is taking.

A TIME TO REBUILD When Joe Biden became president, Beijing was convinced that the United States was in decline.

During the Trump administration, Chinese President Xi Jinping unveiled a phrase that encapsulated Beijing’s growing confidence in this trend: the world was undergoing “great changes unseen in a century.” Xi saw President Donald Trump’s alienation of American allies and partners, erratic handling of the COVID-19 pandemic, and disregard of democratic norms as proof that “the East is rising and the West is falling.” Beijing did not see Trump as tough but as unpredictable and transactional.

He was willing to compromise on autonomy in Hong Kong, human rights in Xinjiang, and even his own technology and tariff policies in exchange for concessions that would help him electorally, such as Chinese agricultural and energy purchases in U.S.

states important to Trump’s political standing.

Beijing did not see this as strength.

When the Biden team entered office, they did not rush into diplomacy with Beijing, as the prior administration had done.

They instead took a step back, reduced high-level meetings, and paused many dialogues that had not achieved results.

With bipartisan support, they focused on replenishing American strengths.

At home, the administration passed landmark legislation on pandemic recovery, infrastructure, semiconductors, and clean energy.

That catalyzed $3.5 trillion in new public and private investment and propelled a post-COVID recovery with the highest growth, lowest inflation, and lowest unemployment of nearly any developed economy.

Meanwhile, China’s economy slowed, and its population shrank.

Economists’ predictions about when China would overtake the United States in nominal GDP went from years to decades.

Abroad, the administration brought U.S.

allies and partners closer together through AUKUS, the trilateral security pact among Australia, the United Kingdom, and the United States, and the Quad (Quadrilateral Security Dialogue), which comprises Australia, India, Japan, and the United States.

It negotiated agreements to expand U.S.

military access in Australia, Japan, Papua New Guinea, and the Philippines.

And it upgraded ties with India, Indonesia, and Vietnam; held unprecedented summits with ASEAN and Pacific Island leaders in Washington; and convened trilateral summits: one with Japan and the Philippines and another with Japan and South Korea.

These efforts demonstrated that American decline was not as imminent as Beijing had hoped.

From that position, the United States intensified diplomacy with China not as an end but as a means to achieve U.S.

interests and mitigate the risk of escalatory spirals.

U.S.

President Joe Biden welcomes Chinese President Xi Jinping at a summit in Woodside, California, November 2023 Kevin Lamarque / Reuters The administration achieved real gains.

When Biden and Xi met in California last fall, they restored and even expanded some military ties to reduce conflict risk.

Beijing took steps to reduce the flow of fentanyl precursors to the United States, going beyond its deal with the Trump administration.

Pottinger and Gallagher imply that diplomacy with China has meant scaling back tougher U.S.

policies.

On the contrary, the administration took more competitive steps while intensifying diplomacy.

Over the last year, the administration upgraded semiconductor export controls on China, established the first-ever screening protocols on outbound investment to China, prohibited transfers of U.S.

personal data to China, and signed legislation forcing China’s ByteDance to divest from TikTok.

The White House launched an investigation into the security risks of Chinese-made electric vehicles, levied new tariffs in strategic sectors and called for them in steel and shipbuilding, and put more of China’s companies on export control lists than the Trump administration did.

The administration also provided billions in new security assistance to Taiwan, including by providing materiel directly from U.S.

stockpiles for the first time.

Despite this track record, Pottinger and Gallagher argue that in the interest of facilitating diplomacy, the Biden administration has been “downplaying affronts by Beijing.” They claim the administration planned to let a Chinese spy balloon overfly the United States without notifying the public.

But the administration immediately limited the balloon’s ability to surveil sensitive sites and made plans to shoot it down safely while maximizing opportunities to collect information about the technology and what China was doing with it.

The authors claim the Biden administration minimized press reports about China’s pursuit of a base in Cuba.

But in fact, the administration indicated that details were murky and revealed that it had been carrying out a whole-of-government strategy to counter China’s overseas bases, including in Cuba, which it launched only weeks after Biden’s inauguration.

Finally, the authors imply that the administration has not firmly defended American values in its competition with China.

But Biden has repeatedly framed the competition as one between democracy and autocracy, has plainly stated that China is a dictatorship, and has accused China of genocide in Xinjiang.

COMMON SENSE, COMMON GROUND The authors rightly assume that China is preparing for a catastrophic conflict over Taiwan.

Their concerns about the U.S.

defense industrial base, shipbuilding delays, and the retirement of older vessels and aircraft are widely shared.

Many steps they propose are underway.

These include expanding the U.S.

military’s footprint in the Indo-Pacific, investing in unmanned or containerized weapons systems and kits that can convert “dumb bombs” into guided munitions, hardening key military facilities, and pre-positioning supplies.

But the authors’ proposal for a $20 billion annual deterrence fund that would “surge and disperse sufficient combat power in Asia” for five years is genuinely novel.

It is also more achievable than their call to effectively double the defense budget.

A deterrence fund could complement the Biden administration’s new Replicator Initiative, which seeks to field thousands of unmanned autonomous systems within two years.

It could also turbocharge U.S.

investments in asymmetric capabilities, such as long-range missiles and advanced mines.

Pottinger and Gallagher also raise concerns about China’s efforts to dominate new technologies, exploit U.S.

dependencies, and export its excess industrial capacity to put competitors out of business.

Yet here again, the Biden administration has already taken many of the steps they propose: new tariffs, coordination with allies and partners on economic and technological issues, investment restrictions, and export controls.

Other steps the authors propose, such as preventing U.S.

funds from enabling investment in blacklisted Chinese companies, are sound and should find bipartisan support.

So, too, is the authors’ call for Washington to recruit Americans, particularly Asia hands and technologists, into government and to make sure that Americans are informed about what’s at stake in the competition with China.

Pottinger and Gallagher provide an important service to the China policy debate by presenting a good-faith critique of the current approach.

But what is most useful about their argument is not the areas of difference with the Biden administration but the areas of overlap.

U.S.

policy toward China will need bipartisan foundations to succeed.

Their essay shows that regardless of where one starts in the China debate, at the moment, most policymakers are arriving at a similar set of common-sense policies.

Rush Doshi is Director of the Initiative on China Strategy at the Council on Foreign Relations and an Assistant Professor at the Edmund A.

Walsh School of Foreign Service at Georgetown University.

He previously served as Deputy Senior Director for China and Taiwan Affairs at the National Security Council during the Biden administration.

The Perils of Estrangement Jessica Chen Weiss and James B.

Steinberg The United States faces a major challenge in managing its relations with China, the world’s second-largest economy and military power.

The Chinese government does not share the United States’ commitment to liberal democracy, is at odds with many of the United States’ key international partners, and pursues economic policies that harm American workers and companies.

Meeting that challenge requires a nuanced understanding of the forces driving China’s external policies and a clear-eyed view of the sources of U.S.

strength.

The path forward suggested by Pottinger and Gallagher reflects neither.

Instead, they offer an illusory appeal to victory, one that will harm the cause of freedom in China, damage Washington’s relations with key U.S.

allies, and risk a dangerous confrontation reminiscent of the worst days of the Cold War—a Cold War they enthusiastically embrace.

We share Pottinger and Gallagher’s hope that the Chinese people will one day enjoy greater freedoms and civil liberties.

But history has shown that U.S.

efforts to bring about change through pressure are as likely to consolidate authoritarian rule as to undermine it.

The authors say they are not calling for “forcible regime change, subversion, or war,” because they know that such extreme efforts carry intolerable risks.

But their proposed tactics, if taken up by Washington, would ensure the most undesirable outcome: a Chinese leadership unwilling to cooperate on shared concerns but domestically strengthened by appeals to nationalist sentiments in the face of a hostile adversary.

Worse yet, the aggressive policies the authors prescribe would alienate important U.S.

partners that have no interest in an “us versus them” approach.

Pottinger and Gallagher try to minimize the extraordinary risks their recommendations present by characterizing them as nothing more than “greater friction,” which would eventually compel Beijing to simply “give up.” What gives them such confidence that China’s nuclear-armed leaders would go down without a fight? This is wishful thinking, not strategy.

They castigate the Biden administration’s approach as a throwback to détente, which the United States used to manage risk with the Soviet Union during the 1970s, but theirs is a revival of the “rollback” of the 1950s, which pushed the rival superpowers to the precipice of nuclear Armageddon.

Adopting a confrontational posture toward Beijing would reinforce the Chinese leadership’s embrace of authoritarian policies.

The Cold War is a chilling reminder of the perils of unconstrained rivalry.

It is also at odds with what the American public wants.

According to a 2023 survey commissioned by the nonprofits National Security Action and Foreign Policy for America, a bipartisan majority of voters—87 percent of Democrats and 68 percent of Republicans—believe that U.S.

leaders should focus more on working to avoid a military conflict than preparing for one.

Only 21 percent regard China as an “enemy”; 76 percent view it as a “competitor.” Chinese leader Xi Jinping’s tightening grip at home and China’s economic and military coercion abroad are cause for deep concern.

Openly adopting a confrontational Cold War posture toward Beijing would only reinforce the Chinese leadership’s embrace of tough, authoritarian policies designed to show resolve and insulate China from U.S.

pressure.

When China’s efforts undermine the interests of the United States and its partners, Washington must take firm, measured steps to meet those specific challenges.

But U.S.

policymakers should keep in mind that China’s aggressive tactics are self-undermining, dimming China’s economic vitality and damaging its international appeal.

Washington needs to play a long game, one that favors its natural strengths.

The economic headwinds that China is now encountering, combined with efforts by the United States to strengthen its economic and technological competitiveness, have created a window for the two countries to stabilize their relationship, which had veered dangerously close to conflict.

It is in the interest of both Beijing and Washington to reduce the risk of war and cooperate on key issues of mutual concern, such as climate change, public health, and the management of potentially destabilizing new technologies.

Xi’s summit with Biden in California last fall was a step in the right direction, resulting in efforts to curb China’s fentanyl-related exports and the restoration of military-to-military communications to reduce the risk of an unintended crisis.

The closing session of the National People’s Congress at the Great Hall of the People in Beijing, March 2024 Tingshu Wang / Reuters Even when direct diplomacy fails to resolve key issues, Washington’s openness to engage demonstrates to the world that the United States is acting responsibly.

Moreover, such engagements provide opportunities to press the Chinese government to change its harmful policies, including support for Russia’s war in Ukraine and other threatening actions.

Even as the United States works to counter Chinese cyberattacks, information operations, and unfair economic practices, it should also welcome Chinese tourists, businesspeople, and students.

The policies Pottinger and Gallagher advocate would only deepen the estrangement between Americans and the Chinese people.

If the authors mean what they say about supporting the Chinese people, they must recognize the importance of these societal ti

</CONTENT>
