<TITLE>Bin Laden’s Catastrophic Success: Al Qaeda Changed the World—but Not in the Way It Expected</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2024-09-06</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.foreignaffairs.com/afghanistan/osama-bin-ladens-911-catastrophic-success</URL>
<AUTHOR>Nelly Lahoud</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
Osama bin Laden's goal wasn't simply terrorism; he aimed to dismantle the global order and recreate a unified Muslim community.
-  Internal communications, including a handwritten notebook, reveal his thinking, including decades-long plans for attacks in the U.S.
-  He linked the Palestinian cause to a broader struggle against perceived foreign oppression of Muslims worldwide, justifying attacks like the 1998 bombings of Kenyan and Tanzanian embassies.
-  Bin Laden viewed 9/11 as the crucial initial blow to force the US out of Muslim-majority states, enabling jihadists to fight autocratic regimes there.
-  Analysis of declassified al-Qaeda documents provides a detailed understanding of his motivations and the strategy behind the attacks.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- Bin Laden was completely unaware of these travails while they were happening.
- The Abbottabad papers show that in the wake of the U.S.
- invasion of Afghanistan , bin Laden disappeared from the scene and was not in command of al Qaeda for three years, even though he continued to release public statements cheering jihadi attacks in Indonesia, Kuwait, Pakistan, Russia, Tunisia, and Yemen.
- It was not until 2004 that bin Laden was finally able to resume contact with second-tier leaders of al Qaeda.
- He was eager to launch a new campaign of international terrorism.
- In one of the first letters he sent after reestablishing contact, he methodically outlined plans to carry out “martyrdom operations akin to the 9/11 New York attack.” If these proved too difficult, he had alternative plans to target rail lines.

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
On September 11, 2001, al Qaeda carried out the deadliest foreign terrorist attack the United States had ever experienced.

To Osama bin Laden and the other men who planned it, however, the assault was no mere act of terrorism.

To them, it represented something far grander: the opening salvo of a campaign of revolutionary violence that would usher in a new historical era.

Although bin Laden was inspired by religion, his aims were geopolitical.

Al Qaeda’s mission was to undermine the contemporary world order of nation-states and re-create the historical umma, the worldwide community of Muslims that was once held together by a common political authority.

Bin Laden believed that he could achieve that goal by delivering what he described as a “decisive blow” that would force the United States to withdraw its military forces from Muslim-majority states, thus allowing jihadis to fight autocratic regimes in those places on a level playing field.

Bin Laden’s worldview and the thinking behind the 9/11 attack are laid bare in a trove of internal communications that were recovered in May 2011, when U.S.

special operations forces killed bin Laden during a raid on the compound in the Pakistani city of Abbottabad where he had spent his final years hiding.

In the years that followed, the U.S.

government declassified some of the documents, but the bulk of them remained under the exclusive purview of the intelligence community.

In November 2017, the CIA declassified an additional 470,000 digital files, including audio, images, videos, and text.

With the help of two research assistants, I pored over 96,000 of those files, including nearly 6,000 pages of Arabic text that form a record of al Qaeda’s internal communications between 2000 and 2011, which I have spent the past three years analyzing.

These documents consist of bin Laden’s notes, his correspondence with associates, letters written by members of his family, and a particularly revealing 220-page handwritten notebook containing transcripts of discussions between members of bin Laden’s immediate family that took place in the compound during the last two months of his life.

The documents provide an unparalleled glimpse into bin Laden’s mind and offer a portrait of the U.S.

“war on terror” as it was seen through the eyes of its chief target.

By the time of 9/11, bin Laden had been contemplating an attack inside the United States for decades.

Many years later, in conversations with family members, he recalled that it was in 1986 that he first suggested that jihadis “ought to strike inside America” to address the plight of the Palestinians, since, in bin Laden’s mind, it was U.S.

support that allowed for the creation of the state of Israel on Palestinian land.

Bin Laden’s concern for the Palestinians was genuine; their suffering, he often reminded his associates, was “the reason we started our jihad.” But the Palestinians mostly served as a convenient stand-in for Muslims all over the world, whom bin Laden portrayed as the collective victims of foreign occupation and oppression.

In his “Declaration of Jihad,” a 1996 public communiqué that came to be known among jihadis as the “Ladenese Epistle,” bin Laden grieved for Muslims whose “blood has been spilled” in places as far-flung as Chechnya, Iraq, Kashmir, and Somalia.

“My Muslim brothers of the world,” he declared, “your brothers in the land of the two holiest sites and Palestine are calling on you for help and asking you to take part in fighting against the enemy, your enemy: the Israelis and the Americans.” This collective battle, bin Laden hoped, would be the first step in reviving the umma.

It soon became clear that bin Laden was ready to back his words with deeds.

In 1998, al Qaeda carried out simultaneous bombings of the U.S.

embassies in Kenya and Tanzania, killing 224 people and wounding more than 4,000.

Emboldened by the international attention those strikes received, bin Laden became more ambitious.

On October 12, 2000, al Qaeda rammed a small boat filled with explosives into the USS Cole as it was refueling in the port of Aden, Yemen, killing 17 U.S.

Navy personnel.

Soon after that, bin Laden told a large gathering of supporters that the attacks represented “a critical turning point in the history of the umma’s ascent toward greater eminence.” The Abbottabad papers include handwritten notes that bin Laden composed in 2002, disclosing “the birth of the idea of 11 September.” They reveal that it was in late October 2000, within weeks of the USS Cole attack, that bin Laden decided to attack the American homeland.

They also reveal his reasoning at the time: bin Laden believed that “the entire Muslim world is subjected to the reign of blasphemous regimes and to American hegemony.” The 9/11 attack was intended to “break the fear of this false god and destroy the myth of American invincibility.” About two weeks after the attack, bin Laden released a short statement in the form of an ultimatum addressed to the United States.

“I have only a few words for America and its people,” he declared.

“I swear by God almighty, who raised the heavens without effort, that neither America nor anyone who lives there will enjoy safety until safety becomes a reality for us living in Palestine and before all the infidel armies leave the land of Muhammad.” The attack had an electrifying effect, and in the years that immediately followed, thousands of young Muslims around the world committed themselves in various ways to bin Laden’s cause.

But a close reading of bin Laden’s correspondence reveals that the world’s most notorious terrorist was ignorant of the limits of his own métier.

Bin Laden’s documents offer a portrait of the “war on terror” as it was seen through the eyes of its chief target.

Bin Laden was born in 1957 in Saudi Arabia.

His father was a wealthy construction magnate whose company was renowned not just for the opulent palaces it built for the Saudi royal family but also for its restoration of the Islamic holy sites in Mecca and Medina.

Bin Laden was raised in comfort, wanting for nothing.

He grew into a poised young man who yearned to take part in political causes around the Muslim world.

In his early jihadi exploits, which involved fighting in Afghanistan in the 1980s and helping finance and coordinate the mujahideen battling the Soviet occupation of that country, he demonstrated that he had learned something about entrepreneurship and management from the family business.

And yet, although bin Laden’s correspondence indicates that he was well versed in Islamic history, particularly the seventh-century military campaigns of the Prophet Muhammad, he had only a perfunctory understanding of modern international relations.

That was reflected in the 9/11 attack itself, which represented a severe miscalculation: bin Laden never anticipated that the United States would go to war in response to the assault.

Indeed, he predicted that in the wake of the attack, the American people would take to the streets, replicating the protests against the Vietnam War and calling on their government to withdraw from Muslim-majority countries.

Instead, Americans rallied behind U.S.

President George W.

Bush and his “war on terror.” In October 2001, when a U.S.-led coalition invaded Afghanistan to hunt down al Qaeda and dislodge the Taliban regime, which had hosted the terrorist group since 1996, bin Laden had no plan to secure his organization’s survival.

The 9/11 attack turned out to be a Pyrrhic victory for al Qaeda.

The group shattered in the immediate aftermath of the Taliban regime’s collapse, and most of its top leaders were either killed or captured.

The rest sought refuge in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas of Pakistan, an autonomous area bordering Afghanistan.

Hiding became a way of life for them.

Their communications reveal that for the rest of bin Laden’s life, the al Qaeda organization never recovered the ability to launch attacks abroad.

(The group did carry out attacks in November 2002 in Kenya but was able to do so only because the operatives tasked with planning them had been dispatched to East Africa in late 2000 and early 2001, before everything fell apart for al Qaeda in Afghanistan.) By 2014, bin Laden’s successor, Ayman al-Zawahiri, found himself more preoccupied with delegitimizing the Islamic State (or ISIS), the jihadi group that eventually overtook al Qaeda, than with rallying Muslims against American hegemony .

Still, it is impossible to look back at the past two decades and not be struck by the degree to which a small band of extremists led by a charismatic outlaw managed to influence global politics.

Bin Laden did change the world—just not in the ways that he wanted.

LETTERS TO A MIDDLE-AGED TERRORIST After fleeing to Pakistan following the Taliban’s defeat, many al Qaeda fighters and operatives were arrested by authorities there.

Fearing the same fate, the remaining al Qaeda leaders and many members of bin Laden’s family covertly crossed the border into Iran in early 2002.

Once there, they were assisted by Sunni militants who helped them rent houses using forged documents.

But by the end of 2002, the Iranian authorities had tracked down most of them and had placed them in a secret prison underground.

They were later moved into a heavily guarded compound, along with their female relatives and children.

In 2008, bin Laden’s son Saad escaped from Iran and wrote a letter to his father detailing how Iranian authorities had repeatedly ignored the al Qaeda detainees’ medical conditions and how “the calamities piled up and the psychological problems increased.” When Saad’s pregnant wife needed to be induced, she was not taken to a hospital until after “the fetus stopped moving”; she was forced “to deliver him after he died.” Saad was convinced that the Iranians “were masters at making us lose our nerve and took pleasure in torturing us psychologically.” So desperate were their conditions that when a Libyan jihadi leader, Abu Uns al-Subayi, was eventually released in 2010, he wrote to bin Laden that Iran is where the “greatest Satan reigns.” Detention there felt like being “exiled from religion,” he wrote, admitting that he had even begged his Iranian captors to deport him to “any other country, even to Israel.” Bin Laden never anticipated that the United States would go to war in response to 9/11.

Bin Laden was completely unaware of these travails while they were happening.

The Abbottabad papers show that in the wake of the U.S.

invasion of Afghanistan , bin Laden disappeared from the scene and was not in command of al Qaeda for three years, even though he continued to release public statements cheering jihadi attacks in Indonesia, Kuwait, Pakistan, Russia, Tunisia, and Yemen.

It was not until 2004 that bin Laden was finally able to resume contact with second-tier leaders of al Qaeda.

He was eager to launch a new campaign of international terrorism.

In one of the first letters he sent after reestablishing contact, he methodically outlined plans to carry out “martyrdom operations akin to the 9/11 New York attack.” If these proved too difficult, he had alternative plans to target rail lines.

His associates quickly set him straight: al Qaeda had been crippled, and such operations were out of the question.

In September 2004, a second-tier leader known as Tawfiq wrote a letter to bin Laden describing just how difficult things had been in the immediate aftermath of the U.S.-led invasion of Afghanistan.

“Our afflictions and troubles were heart-rending, and the weakness, failure, and aimlessness that befell us were harrowing,” he wrote.

He lamented that bin Laden’s “absence and inability to experience [their] painful reality” had itself fed the turmoil.

“We Muslims were defiled, desecrated, and our state was ripped asunder,” he reported.

“Our lands were occupied; our resources were plundered.

.

.

.

This is what happened to jihadis in general, and to us in al Qaeda in particular.” Another second-tier leader, Khalid al-Habib, explained in a letter to bin Laden that during his three-year absence, their “battlefield achievements were negligible.” He counted a total of three “very modest operations, mostly with [rockets], and from a distance.” Another correspondent told bin Laden that al Qaeda’s “external work”—that is, attacks abroad—had been “halted” because of the unrelenting pressure that Pakistan was exerting on the jihadis.

As if this weren’t bad enough, bin Laden learned that al Qaeda had been sold out by most of their erstwhile Afghan sympathizers and the Taliban—“90 percent of whom,” Habib complained, “had been lured by the shiny dollars.” Osama bin Laden's former compound in Abbottabad, Pakistan, April 2012 Akhtar Soomro / Reuters A Lifeline for al Qaeda But around the time that bin Laden was able to reestablish contact, things started looking up for al Qaeda.

After the U.S.-led coalition had ousted the Taliban from power in Afghanistan, the next phase of Bush’s war on terrorism was the 2003 invasion of Iraq, a country ruled by a secular tyrant, Saddam Hussein, who viewed jihadis with hostility.

The U.S.-led invasion put a swift end to Saddam’s brutal reign but also led to the disbanding of the Iraqi army and the hollowing out of other secular government institutions.

Initially, Arab Sunnis, the minority group that had dominated Iraq under Saddam, bore the lion’s share of the sectarian violence that followed the invasion.

This proved to be a lifeline for al Qaeda and other jihadi groups, which were able to position themselves as the defenders of the Sunnis.

As Habib put it in his 2004 letter to bin Laden: “When God knew of our afflictions and helplessness, he opened the door of jihad for us and for the entire umma in Iraq.” Habib was referring, specifically, to the rise of Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, a Jordanian jihadi who had come to prominence in the aftermath of the U.S.

invasion.

By 2004, Zarqawi, and not bin Laden, was the leader of the world’s most powerful jihadi group.

Aside from their shared commitment to violent jihad, the two men had little in common.

Bin Laden had enjoyed a privileged upbringing; Zarqawi had grown up poor, had done time in prison, and had emerged not just as a religious extremist but also as a hardened ex-convict and a brutal thug.

Despite the vast gulf between the two men, Zarqawi was eager for his group, Jamaat al-Tawhid wal-Jihad, to merge with al Qaeda.

In a series of missives to bin Laden, Zarqawi made clear that his followers were “the sons of the Father”—that is, bin Laden—and that his group was a mere “branch of the original.” Zarqawi also assured al Qaeda’s leaders that he was collaborating with and seeking to unite all the jihadi factions in Iraq.

Zarqawi’s enthusiasm pleased bin Laden.

“The merger of the group [Jamaat] al-Tawhid wal-Jihad [would be] tremendous,” bin Laden wrote to his deputy Zawahiri and Tawfiq, urging them “to give this matter considerable attention, for it is a major step toward uniting the efforts of the jihadis.” In December 2004, bin Laden formalized the merger by publicly appointing Zarqawi as the leader of a new group, al Qaeda in Mesopotamia (often referred to in Western media as al Qaeda in Iraq).

Zarqawi’s initiative eventually spurred jihadi groups in Somalia, Yemen, and North Africa to formally align themselves with al Qaeda.

These groups did not directly grow out of the original organization, but their leaders saw many benefits in acquiring the internationally feared al Qaeda brand, especially the chance to improve their standing in the eyes of their followers and to gain international media attention, which they hoped would help them raise money and recruit new adherents.

It worked.

Fixated on al Qaeda, counterterrorist authorities all over the world often subsumed all jihadis under a single umbrella, unwittingly giving individuals who wanted to associate themselves with bin Laden a larger selection of groups to potentially join.

Thus, although the al Qaeda organization was broken, its brand lived on through the deeds of groups that acted in its name.

All of this flowed from Zarqawi’s alliance with bin Laden.

In early 2007, a Saudi jihadi cleric, Bishr al-Bishr, described the merger in a letter to a senior al Qaeda leader as an instance of God having “shown mercy on al Qaeda,” which would have come to an end had it not been for “the amazing jihadi victories in Iraq, which raised the value of al Qaeda’s stocks.” It was a divine intervention, he assessed: “God’s way of repaying the people of jihad for their sacrifices in his path.” THINGS FALL APART Bin Laden had assumed that those who pledged their allegiance to him would pursue the kind of attacks against the United States that al Qaeda had pioneered.

Their success, he hoped, would “raise the morale of Muslims, who would, in turn, become more engaged and supportive of jihadis,” as he put it in a letter to Zawahiri and Tawfiq in December 2004.

Once again, bin Laden had miscalculated.

The decision to bestow the al Qaeda imprimatur on groups that he did not control soon backfired.

Zarqawi failed to unite Iraq’s jihadi groups under his banner, and the country’s most established jihadi group, Ansar al-Sunna (also known as Ansar al-Islam) refused to merge with him.

Before long, bin Laden and his followers found themselves at the receiving end of letters that chronicled the squabbles among their new associates.

“Ansar al-Sunna have been spreading lies about me,” Zarqawi complained in one.

“They say that I have become like [Antar] al-Zawabiri,” the leader of a notoriously extremist Algerian group who had been killed in 2002 and whom many jihadis had considered to be overzealous even by their standards.

“Can you imagine?!” he fumed.

More disturbing for al Qaeda than Zarqawi’s vain whining, however, were his group’s indiscriminate attacks, which resulted in massive Iraqi casualties, particularly among Shiites.

Bin Laden wanted al Qaeda to make headlines by killing and injuring Americans, not Iraqi civilians—even if they were Shiites, whom Sunni jihadis saw as heretics.

The new generation of jihadis, bin Laden concluded, had lost their way.

From their hideouts in Pakistan and the tribal areas, al Qaeda’s leaders struggled to unify the militant groups in Iraq that were now at the center of global jihadism.

But the divisions among them became even more entrenched.

Zawahiri tried to mediate between Zarqawi and Ansar al-Sunna, but his efforts failed.

Ansar al-Sunna made it clear to al Qaeda that unity with Zarqawi was conditional on “correcting the ways of al Qaeda in Mesopotamia.” Atiyah Abd al-Rahman (generally referred to as Atiyah), who oversaw al Qaeda’s external contacts and relations at the time, grew ever more dismayed with Zarqawi’s leadership and wrote to bin Laden that “we cannot leave the brother to act on the basis of his judgment alone.” In a December 2005 letter intercepted by U.S.

intelligence, Atiyah urged Zarqawi “to lessen the number of attacks, even to cut the current daily attacks in half, even less,” pointing out that “the most important thing is for jihad to continue, and a protracted war is to our advantage.” Things went from bad to worse for al Qaeda after Zarqawi was killed by a U.S.

airstrike in 2006.

His successors declared themselves the Islamic State of Iraq without consulting bin Laden, Zawahiri, or any other senior al Qaeda figures.

In 2007, ISI leaders stopped responding to al Qaeda’s letters altogether, a silence that reflected, in part, the fact that the Iraqi jihadis had begun losing ground to what became known as the Sunni Awakening, which saw U.S.

forces forge ties with Sunni tribal sheikhs in order to confront the terrorists.

ON THE SIDELINES Al Qaeda’s management struggles were hardly limited to Iraq.

In 2009, a group of jihadis in Yemen dubbed themselves al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula without alerting the parent group or even publicly pledging allegiance to bin Laden.

They were to prove a

</CONTENT>
