<TITLE>The Middle East’s Dangerous Escalation: A Conversation With Audrey Kurth Cronin, Marc Lynch, Dennis Ross, and Dana Stroul</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2024-08-20</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.foreignaffairs.com/podcasts/middle-easts-dangerous-escalation</URL>
<AUTHOR>Audrey Kurth Cronin</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
This Foreign Affairs podcast discusses the escalating Middle East conflict following Hamas's attack on Israel.
-  Experts Audrey Kurth Cronin, Marc Lynch, Dennis Ross, and Dana Stroul assess the high risk of regional war, citing recent Israeli strikes, Hezbollah responses, and targeted Hamas killings.
-  The discussion focuses on the dangers of an ungoverned Gaza, the potential for a wider conflict, and the diplomatic efforts needed to de-escalate the situation.
-  Participants argue for Israeli restraint and the importance of U.S.
- and international intervention.
-  The podcast connects to a recent Foreign Affairs issue, highlighting several authors' previous work on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the broader regional situation.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- So, Dana, let me start with you, and let’s go right to the news.
- We’ve seen a number of rather spectacular Israeli strikes in recent days, one of a Hezbollah commander in Beirut responding to a missile attack that seems to have come to Hezbollah that killed 12 people in a Druze village in Israel earlier this week.
- There was a targeted killing of a Hamas leader in Tehran a couple days ago, confirmation of the death of another Hamas leader in Gaza.
- Just stepping back and making sense of this moment, as you look at the risk of escalation in the region more broadly, how high do you rate the danger? What are you looking at?

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
DAN KURTZ-PHELAN Ever since Hamas’s attack on Israel on October 7, the Middle East has flirted dangerously with a full-scale regional war.

Over the past week, the situation has escalated once again, with strikes and counterstrikes that have put the region closer to the precipice than perhaps any point in the past year.

To discuss these latest developments and the future of Gaza, I was joined by Audrey Kurth Cronin, Marc Lynch, Dennis Ross, and Dana Stroul for a Foreign Affairs event on August 1.

Good afternoon, and welcome all to this discussion of the state of the war in Gaza as well as the risk of an escalating war in the Middle East more broadly.

This discussion very loosely marks the release of our July/August issue in which one of our speakers today, Audrey Kurth Cronin, has a fantastic piece called “How Hamas Ends.” Audrey is the director of the Carnegie Mellon Institute on Strategy and Technology and also the author of a really definitive book called How Terrorism Ends; we stole the title for the piece.

But I wanted to gather this particular group, not so much because of the issue, but because of the work they’ve all done in Foreign Affairs more generally in recent months.

I will very briefly introduce them before we get into discussion.

Dana Stroul is now Research Director at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy.

She served as Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense overseeing the Middle East from 2021 until late 2023.

Her most recent piece for us was called “The Dangers of an Ungoverned Gaza.” Marc Lynch of George Washington University wrote an essay, I think in our previous issue, called “The Two-State Mirage,” and also did a fantastic piece called “The Coming Arab Backlash” in the last couple months, and the piece shortly after October 7 arguing against a full-scale Israeli invasion of Gaza, so lots of relevant work.

And Dennis Ross, one of the U.S.

foreign policy hands with really the deepest experience and expertise on both the Israeli-Palestinian issue and the region more broadly across three or four administrations, most recently the Obama administration.

His most recent piece that we have published thus far was making the case for a unilateral Israeli ceasefire in Gaza.

He has another coming in a few days that we’ll perhaps preview here.

Stay informed.

In-depth analysis delivered weekly.

So, Dana, let me start with you, and let’s go right to the news.

We’ve seen a number of rather spectacular Israeli strikes in recent days, one of a Hezbollah commander in Beirut responding to a missile attack that seems to have come to Hezbollah that killed 12 people in a Druze village in Israel earlier this week.

There was a targeted killing of a Hamas leader in Tehran a couple days ago, confirmation of the death of another Hamas leader in Gaza.

Just stepping back and making sense of this moment, as you look at the risk of escalation in the region more broadly, how high do you rate the danger? What are you looking at? And from a policy perspective, what do you think the key steps that the United States and other key actors should be taking at this point to manage those risks? DANA STROUL Well, thanks so much for having me.

Pleased to join this esteemed panel and you, and thanks to CFR for all of the support and having me today.

Before I talk about the situation we’re in right this minute, let me just take a step back first and frame that after the Hamas attack on October 7, President Biden here was quite clear that the U.S.

position was going to be supporting Israel in its campaign in Gaza, but setting the theater and using diplomacy and other tools to prevent the full-scale regional war.

And what we’ve seen since October 7 is while the IDF, the Israel Defense Forces, have worked to militarily dismantle Hamas in Gaza, they have also faced pressure on multiple other fronts.

So of course, the one that is very much in the news today is the pressure in Israel’s northern arena, which is Lebanese Hezbollah, which started on October 8 with an increasingly sophisticated weapons and deeper insight Israel level of attacks, which denies Israel the ability to only focus on its military campaign in Gaza.

Then we saw Iran-backed militias and proxies in Iraq and Syria.

Both launched drones and missiles toward Israel, but also over 180 attacks on U.S.

forces in Iraq and Syria, who are there continuing the defeat ISIS mission.

And then the Houthis, another Iran-backed proxy group in Yemen, who have both launched a campaign to threaten freedom of navigation and choke off freedom of commercial shipping in the Red Sea, but have also launched a drone attack toward Israel that hit Tel Aviv only a couple weeks ago.

And then finally, of course, we have the Iran direct attack on Israel in mid-April, which was unprecedented.

Normally, Iran seeks to impose costs on Israel and the United States through its network of proxies and terrorists.

Yet in mid-April we saw a threshold-crossing event, which was Iran launching a full-scale lobby of ballistic missiles, cruise missiles, and attack drones, violating the airspace of the entire region, all directed at Israel.

And also a precedent-setting event was that the United States and Israel were able to work with a coalition of European and Arab allies all together to defend against that attack.

So there’s been different responses to different parts of this morass.

What is noteworthy is that, essentially, Iran, to date, has appeared to calculate that while it wants to impose costs on Israel and it wants to pressure Israel and it wants to impose costs on the United States, it seeks to do that below the threshold of full-scale conventional conflict.

It appears that Hezbollah, to date, has made the same calculation: maintain pressure but not have the full-scale war.

The same thing with the Houthis, and the same thing with the militias in Iraq and Syria.

The big question over the past week: are the events that we’ve seen some miscalculation? Which is Hezbollah launching a rocket into northern Israel at the Majdal Shams town, as you noted, Dan, which resulted in a mass casualty event of innocent kids playing soccer that were killed.

And we know that everyone perceived that to have crossed a line, because Hezbollah tried to deny it and the White House had to come out and say, “No, this was absolutely an Iran-supplied rocket launched from areas that Hezbollah controls in Lebanon.” And then the question was, how was Israel going to respond to what was clearly a redline that was crossed? Now, from an Israeli perspective, what they did was target basically the second-in-command in Hezbollah in Beirut.

From their perspective, they are managing escalation because it was targeted, it was precise.

It was one building, designed to avoid collateral damage, and avoid mass civilian casualties.

This is the same playbook as what Israel did to respond after Iran’s unprecedented direct attack in April: targeted, avoiding collateral damage, and avoiding civilian casualties.

And one could argue the same thing with the killing of Ismail Haniyeh in Tehran just a few days ago: precise in appearing to target one apartment within a larger complex, avoiding collateral damage, and avoiding civilian casualties.

But the regime in Tehran has been publicly humiliated on the same day as the new Iranian president’s inauguration, and it exposes both Hezbollah’s operational security and Iran’s operational security, that they can’t keep their people safe.

Hard to see how they don’t respond.

And the question is, does the assumption and the motivations of the past 10 months, which is to respond and incrementally escalate all below that threshold of conventional conflict—does it hold today, or has Iran’s calculus changed? We’re likely to see something similar to April 13.

Again, that threshold has been crossed of this direct state-on-state attack.

I’m looking for whether or not there’s another direct state-on-state attack.

Is it a one-off, or are there multiple rounds? Is a way that Iran signals its displeasure and rejection of Israeli actions to make, this time, a coordinated attack with other proxies? Could it be an Iran attack together with Hezbollah, together with the Houthis, together with the militias in Iraq and Syria? Is it only directed at Israel, or is it also directed at U.S.

forces? Is there collateral damage and civilian casualties or is it more military targets, which is probably what Israel perceived itself to be targeting? Those are the questions I’m looking for.

And based on decisions that are coming out of Iran in the coming hours and days, I think it will determine whether or not we have that full-scale regional war; or again, we are able to manage it below that threshold of full-scale conventional conflict.

DAN KURTZ-PHELAN Marc, let me put that same topic to you.

I mean, you’ve looked at the regional dimensions of this going back much longer than the last 10 months, but certainly since October 7; that’s been a lot of the focus of your writing.

Do you see this changing the regional dynamics at all? And how do you see those escalation risks from that regional perspective? MARC LYNCH Thanks, Dan, and thanks, everybody.

I think Dana laid this out extremely well, and I agree with her assessment of how both Iran, Hezbollah, and the others have all been trying to stay beneath the threshold of full-scale escalation.

But I think the other thing which Dana pointed out, which is really important, is that with each redline that gets passed and overcome, it’s not just that we’re moving to a higher level of conflict.

It’s also that uncertainty goes up, and that it’s much easier to misread what the intended signal is of a particular kind of action or provocation or the like.

And the steady erosion of the redlines really is quite alarming, because I think that does help to prevent escalation dynamics in the past.

And right now, that’s really not there.

The other place you have to be looking at escalation risks is not just in the tit-for-tat between Iran, its proxies, allies, and Israel, but also in what this is doing to the regional temperature.

I mean, we all know that Arab regimes are primarily interested in their own survival, and they’ve been very, very attuned to the ways in which their public opinion is extremely upset about what’s been happening in Gaza.

And they’re not only looking at the risk of war, they’re also looking at the risk of domestic instability, uprisings, protests, and the like.

And the ironic thing here, or perhaps not ironic, is that the temperature had been going down.

I mean, if you compare where things are to where they were, say, three, four months ago, I think most of the key Arab regimes more or less felt like they had weathered the storm and that it had settled into something like an acceptable level of discontent that they typically deal with.

And I think one of the things they have to be looking at right now is whether that’s about to change.

And because they’re so focused on those domestic issues—and remember, all of these regimes outside of a few Gulf states are living on the edge.

Their economies are disastrous.

They’re already about as repressive as they can get.

And they really are—this is the summer, it’s hot because of climate change; people are thirsty, they’re hot.

It’s really easy for things to spiral out of control in a place like Egypt or Jordan or Iraq or any place else.

So what they’re looking at right now is something where they might be forced to take things which are not what we would expect, based on their rational self-interest.

Nobody wants to escalate.

Nobody wants war with Israel.

No Arab regime wants that.

But when they’re faced with the possibility of sudden rolling protests that are in their capitals, you might see them take unexpected actions which could then lead to that misperception, miscalculations; because you don’t understand why Egypt’s doing what it’s doing, Jordan’s doing what it’s doing, and the like.

And that’s really what I’m worried about right now, in addition to the rational dynamics that Dana was talking about, the real risk that all it could take is one missile to go the wrong way, and suddenly things can look very, very different.

The other thing is, don’t only look at Gaza and Lebanon.

The last thing I want to point out is you’ve got to keep an eye on what’s happening in Jerusalem and the West Bank more broadly, but especially Jerusalem, where Israeli politicians are taking very provocative actions, which are also the type of thing that, in places like Jordan and other parts of the Middle East, have traditionally set off large-scale protests.

So there’s a lot of tinder that’s smoking right now, independently of the tit-for-tat of escalation.

DAN KURTZ-PHELAN A ton to follow up on there, but I want to get Audrey to focus a bit on what these two strikes, one a couple days ago and then the confirmation of the death of a Hamas military leader in Gaza, what this is likely to mean for Hamas going forward, and for the war in Gaza ,specifically.

This, in some ways, could be a case study in a future edition of your book.

What effect do you expect this to have? Does this get Israel closer to its goal? Does it get everyone closer to the goal of ending the war? How do you expect this to play out? AUDREY KURTH CRONIN Yes.

Well, actually, as a case study, it probably started 40 years ago because the Israelis have been very much dependent upon targeted killing or assassination, depending on your preferred term, for some years.

But let me quickly mention, before I get into the substance, I wanted to express my condolences to you, Ambassador Ross, on the death of Martin Indyk.

I know he was a particularly close friend, and it’s a huge loss for all of us.

So I’m very sorry for his death a week ago.

Condolences to you.

DENNIS ROSS Thank you, I appreciate that.

AUDREY KURTH CRONIN So, the question of decapitation and how that plays into a counterterrorism strike—Mr.

Netanyahu was addressing Congress a few days ago and he said, “Our fight is your fight.” And so now it appears that the Netanyahu government’s regional war is our regional war.

I think it’s alarming the way things are turning.

Let’s hope that we have the continuation of some rationality on all sides.

I’ve seen terrorist attacks transition into much broader regional wars on more than one occasion.

Of course, the most famous is World War I.

That’s become almost a trope.

But I think that when you use strictly a military response to what is essentially a political attack, and you don’t have a political plan for the long term as to what your theory of victory is or what your theory of success is, this is kind of tit-for-tat getting out of control that is quite common, unfortunately, with state responses to terrorism in their counterterrorism.

So the Israeli targeted killings, as I mentioned before, have been going on for decades, if not actually from the founding of Israel.

But had targeted killing been a promising counterterrorism approach, October 7 would never have happened because, of course, the Israelis have had some very high-profile killings; not least the founder of Hamas, [Ahmed] Yassin, in 2004, as well as many other Hamas leaders.

So they’ve succeeded now in killing over a hundred leaders.

The assassination of Haniyeh leaves them with no one to talk to.

So the other side that I would say greatly alarms me with respect to this development is that it seems to have no emphasis on the fate of the hostages.

There doesn’t seem to be a plan, a political avenue through which to get a deal, and getting a deal is the only way to get the hostages back.

So the other tragedy I see in all of this is the families of the hostages.

It’s quite clear that a Grapes of Wrath–style continued targeted killing, as happened in the aftermath of the 1972 Olympics Munich massacre, is what the policy is.

And the difference between taking out all of Hamas’s leaders, including Haniyeh in Iran, and what happened in the aftermath of 1972 Munich Olympics massacre, is that the hostages were dead then.

So I’m quite concerned.

I think that continuing with this capturing or killing of the leader, decapitation strategy, which is quite common across many different groups—I’ve studied 457 different terrorist groups—the ones that seem to succeed with decapitation tend to be small, hierarchically structured, characterized by a cult of personality; usually they’re young, less than 10 years old.

None of those things describes Hamas.

Hamas is a highly networked, older, territorially associated group, very different from any of the groups in any of my case studies that have ended through the use of decapitation strategies.

So I find it a shame that our friends, the Israelis, keep trying the same approach.

And their stated goal, which is to end Hamas, in my opinion, is getting further and further away.

DAN KURTZ-PHELAN Thank you, Audrey, for that, as well as for mentioning Martin Indyk, who was a great contributor to Foreign Affairs among many other things.

I think everyone in attendance should have gotten a note from me, I hope, earlier, that included, among other things, a really fantastic podcast interview he did a couple months ago, which is still quite worth listening to.

But Dennis, let me go to you.

I’m going to wrap two questions into one.

First, just your quick sense of the regional risks and whether you share the analysis that others have offered thus far, but also focusing in on Gaza specifically, how you see the prospects for a ceasefire.

You, of course, made the case in Foreign Affairs recently that there should be a unilateral Israeli ceasefire; that would be in Israel’s interest in the near term.

Things have changed quite a bit since then.

Where do you see that negotiation? And what will it take to get that over the line, especially in the wake of what we’ve seen in the last week? DENNIS ROSS Well, thanks.

Thanks for the easy questions.

But there’s, I’d say, two things to start with.

One, the greatest single risk right now is the unintended consequences or a failed execution of attacks that one or the other side wants to carry out.

I have no doubt—and basically, Dana and Marc’s analysis of the region, I have really very little to quibble with, shockingly.

But the point is, when each side decides that they’re going to signal with the use of force, you always run the risk that you’re going to hit the wrong target.

So even if the intention is one way, the execution may produce something not at all intended.

That’s what I think we saw on Saturday.

Dana put it well.

Hezbollah tried to run away from their own attack because they understood this was not the intent, and they feared what the Israeli response was going to be.

Israel chose to respond in a way that was designed to still demonstrate, unmistakably, “You crossed a line, we will cross a line.

We will attack in Beirut, but we’ll do it in such a targeted, limited way that we’re signaling you what our intent is.” And the question—and Dana was raising this, and I think Marc was as well.

Are we at a point where Iran is going to try to do something that fits that same methodology? The methodology of, “We have no choice because we have been embarrassed, we’ve been humiliated.

By the way, our own proxies can’t see us doing nothing in response to this, if we are to retain them as proxies quite the same way.” So there’s multiple reasons why they want to use that methodology, meaning, “We are making a statement, but we’re doing it in a way where that turns this into maybe a round but not a war.” The question is, how good are their options for being able to do that? Even if they intend to keep it limited, will they hit the targets they intend? From an Israeli standpoint, if there are impacts within Israel, it depends on what’s been hit.

It depends if people die.

Even highly symbolic targets where there’s very few casualties are likely to, again, produce a kind of response in kind.

If I thought thi

</CONTENT>
