<TITLE>The Perils of Isolationism: The World Still Needs America—and America Still Needs the World</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2024-08-27</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.foreignaffairs.com/united-states/perils-isolationism-condoleezza-rice</URL>
<AUTHOR>Condoleezza Rice</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
This Foreign Affairs article argues that the current geopolitical situation with China is more dangerous than the Cold War.
-  Key differences include China's integration into the global economy, contrasting with the Soviet Union's isolationism, and China's pragmatic approach to authoritarianism compared to the Soviet Union's ideological rigidity.
-  The article warns of the potential for direct military conflict between the US and China, citing China's territorial disputes with U.S.
- allies and partners, particularly concerning Taiwan.
-  The author highlights the risk of US isolationism, drawing parallels to previous eras of great power competition, and emphasizes the need for a strong international response to China's actions.
-  The article's central thesis is that the current situation requires a more robust and careful approach than a simple Cold War analogy would suggest.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- After 9/11, the world united in tackling terrorism, a problem that almost every country was experiencing in some form.
- Within a few weeks of the attack, the UN Security Council unanimously passed a resolution allowing the tracking of terrorist financing across borders.
- Countries quickly harmonized their airport security standards.
- The United States soon joined with other countries to create the Proliferation Security Initiative, a forum for sharing information on suspicious cargo that would grow to include over 100 member states.
- Fast-forward to 2020, and the world saw the revenge of the sovereign state.

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
In times of uncertainty, people reach for historical analogies.

After 9/11, George W.

Bush administration officials invoked Pearl Harbor as a standard comparison in processing the intelligence failure that led to the attack.

Secretary of State Colin Powell referred to Imperial Japan’s attack in making the case that Washington should deliver an ultimatum to the Taliban, saying, “Decent countries don’t launch surprise attacks.” And as officials in the Situation Room tried to assess progress in Afghanistan and, later, Iraq, another analogy came up more than a few times: U.S.

President Lyndon Johnson’s disastrous reliance on body counts in Vietnam.

Even if history doesn’t repeat itself, it sometimes rhymes.

Today’s favorite analogy is the Cold War .

The United States again faces an adversary that has global reach and insatiable ambition, with China taking the place of the Soviet Union.

This is a particularly attractive comparison, of course, because the United States and its allies won the Cold War.

But the current period is not a Cold War redux.

It is more dangerous.

China is not the Soviet Union.

The Soviet Union was self-isolating, preferring autarky to integration, whereas China ended its isolation in the late 1970s.

A second difference between the Soviet Union and China is the role of ideology.

Under the Brezhnev Doctrine that governed Eastern Europe, an ally had to be a carbon copy of Soviet-style communism.

China, by contrast, is largely agnostic about the internal composition of other states.

It fiercely defends the primacy and superiority of the Chinese Communist Party but does not insist that others do the equivalent, even if it is happy to support authoritarian states by exporting its surveillance technology and social media services.

So if the current competition is not Cold War 2.0, then what is it? Giving in to the impulse to find historical references, if not analogies, one may find more food for thought in the imperialism of the late nineteenth century and the zero-sum economies of the interwar period.

Now, as then, revisionist powers are acquiring territory through force, and the international order is breaking down.

But perhaps the most striking and worrying similarity is that today, as in the previous eras, the United States is tempted to turn inward.

THE REVENGE OF GEOPOLITICS While previous eras of competition were characterized by great-power clashes, during the Cold War, territorial conflict was fought largely through proxies, as in Angola and Nicaragua.

Moscow mostly confined its use of military force to its own sphere of influence in Eastern Europe, as when it crushed uprisings in Hungary and Czechoslovakia.

The 1979 Soviet invasion of Afghanistan crossed a new line, but the move did not fundamentally challenge U.S.

interests, and the conflict eventually became a proxy war.

Where Soviet and U.S.

forces did face each other directly, across the German divide, the extreme danger of the two Berlin crises gave way to a kind of tense stability thanks to nuclear deterrence.

Today’s security landscape features the danger of direct military conflict between great powers.

China’s territorial claims challenge U.S.

allies from Japan to the Philippines and other U.S.

partners in the region, such as India and Vietnam.

Long-held U.S.

interests such as freedom of navigation run into direct conflict with China’s maritime ambitions.

Then there is Taiwan.

An attack on Taiwan would require a U.S.

military response, even if the policy of “strategic ambiguity” created uncertainty about the exact nature of it.

For years, the United States has acted as a kind of rheostat in the Taiwan Strait, with the goal of preserving the status quo.

Since 1979, administrations from both parties have sold arms to Taiwan.

President Bill Clinton deployed the USS Independence to the strait in 1996 in response to Beijing’s aggressive activity.

In 2003, the Bush administration publicly chastised Taiwanese President Chen Shui-bian when he proposed a referendum that sounded very much like a vote on independence.

All along, the goal was to maintain—or occasionally, restore—what had become a relatively stable status quo.

Xi has turned out to be a true Marxist.

In recent years, Beijing’s aggressive military activities around Taiwan have challenged that equilibrium.

In Washington, strategic ambiguity has largely given way to open discussion of how to deter and, if necessary, repel a Chinese invasion.

But Beijing could threaten Taiwan in other ways.

It could blockade the island, as Chinese forces have practiced in exercises.

Or it could seize small, uninhabited Taiwanese islands, cut underwater cables, or launch large-scale cyberattacks.

These strategies might be smarter than a risky and difficult assault on Taiwan and would complicate a U.S.

response.

The overarching point is that Beijing has Taiwan in its sights.

Chinese leader Xi Jinping , who views the island as a rogue province, wants to complete the restoration of China and take his place in the pantheon of leaders next to Mao Zedong.

Hong Kong is now effectively a province of China, and bringing Taiwan to heel would fulfill Xi’s ambition.

That risks open conflict between U.S.

and Chinese forces.

Alarmingly, the United States and China still have none of the deconfliction measures in place that the United States and Russia do.

During the 2008 war in Georgia, for instance, Michael Mullen, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, had ongoing contact with his Russian counterpart, Nikolai Makarov, so as to avoid an incident as the U.S.

Air Force flew Georgian troops home from Iraq to join the fight.

Compare that with 2001, when a hot-dogging Chinese pilot hit a U.S.

reconnaissance plane and forced it to the ground.

The crew was detained on Hainan Island, and for three days, Washington was unable to make high-level contact with the Chinese leadership.

I was national security adviser at the time.

Finally, I located my Chinese counterpart, who was on a trip in Argentina, and got the Argentines to take a phone to him at a barbecue.

“Tell your leaders to take our call,” I implored.

Only then were we able to defuse the crisis and free the crew.

The reopening of military-to-military contacts with China earlier this year, after a four-year freeze, was a welcome development.

But it is a far cry from the types of procedures and lines of communication needed to prevent accidental catastrophe.

China’s conventional military modernization is impressive and accelerating.

The country now has the largest navy in the world, with over 370 ships and submarines.

The growth in China’s nuclear arsenal is also alarming.

While the United States and the Soviet Union came to a more or less common understanding of how to maintain the nuclear equilibrium during the Cold War, that was a two-player game.

If China’s nuclear modernization continues, the world will face a more complicated, multiplayer scenario—and without the safety net that Moscow and Washington developed.

The potential for conflict comes against the backdrop of an arms race in revolutionary technologies: artificial intelligence, quantum computing, synthetic biology, robotics, advances in space, and others.

In 2017, Xi gave a speech in which he declared that China would surpass the United States in these frontier technologies by 2035.

Although he was undoubtedly trying to rally China’s scientists and engineers, it may be a speech he has come to regret.

Just as it was after the Soviet Union launched the Sputnik satellite, the United States was forced to confront the possibility that it could lose a technological race to its main adversary—a realization that has spurred a concerted pushback from Washington.

Shipping containers in Oakland, California, July 2022 Carlos Barria / Reuters When the COVID-19 pandemic hit in 2020, the United States suddenly understood further vulnerabilities.

The supply chain for everything from pharmacological inputs to rare-earth minerals depended on China.

Beijing had taken the lead in industries that the United States once dominated, such as the production of batteries.

Access to high-end semiconductors, an industry created by American giants such as Intel, turned out to depend on the security of Taiwan, where 90 percent of advanced chip making takes place.

It is hard to overstate the shock and sense of betrayal that gripped U.S.

leaders.

U.S.

policy toward China was always something of an experiment, with proponents of economic engagement betting that it would induce political reform.

For decades, the benefits flowing from the bet seemed to outweigh the downsides.

Even if there were problems with intellectual property protection and market access (and there were), Chinese domestic growth fueled international economic growth.

China was a hot market, a good place to invest, and a valued supplier of low-cost labor.

Supply chains stretched from China across the world.

By the time China joined the World Trade Organization, in 2001, the total trade volume between the United States and China had increased roughly fivefold over the previous decade, reaching $120 billion.

It seemed inevitable that China would change internally, since economic liberalization and political control were ultimately incompatible.

Xi came to power agreeing with this maxim, but not in the way the West had hoped: instead of economic liberalization, he chose political control.

Not surprisingly, the United States eventually reversed course, beginning with the Trump administration and continuing through the Biden administration.

A bipartisan agreement emerged that China’s behavior was unacceptable.

As a result, the United States’ technological decoupling from China is now well underway, and a labyrinth of restrictions impedes outbound and inbound investment.

For now, American universities remain open to training Chinese graduate students and to international collaboration, both of which have significant benefits for the U.S.

scientific community.

But there is far more awareness of the challenge that these activities can pose for national security.

So far, however, decoupling does not extend to the full range of commercial activity.

The international economy will still be well served by trade and investment between the world’s two largest economies.

The dream of seamless integration may be dead, but there are benefits—including to global stability—if Beijing continues to have a stake in the international system.

Some problems, such as climate change, will be difficult to address without China’s involvement.

Washington and Beijing will need to find a new basis for a workable relationship.

THE RUSSIAN EMPIRE REBORN In the final 2012 presidential debate, U.S.

President Barack Obama argued that his opponent, Mitt Romney, was overhyping the danger from Russia, suggesting that the country was no longer a geopolitical threat.

With the 2014 annexation of Crimea, it became clear that Russian President Vladimir Putin begged to differ.

The next step, Putin’s invasion of Ukraine in 2022, has brought his ambition to restore the Russian Empire face to face with the redlines of Article 5 of NATO’s founding treaty, which stipulates that an attack on one member is treated as an attack on all.

Early in the war, NATO worried that Moscow might attack supply lines in Poland and Romania, both members of the alliance.

So far, Putin has shown no appetite for triggering Article 5, but the Black Sea (which the tsars considered a Russian lake) has again become a source of conflict and tension.

Remarkably, Ukraine, a country that barely has a navy, has successfully challenged Russian naval power and can now move grain along its own coastline.

Even more devastating for Putin, his gambit has produced a strategic alignment among Europe, the United States, and much of the rest of the world, leading to extensive sanctions against Russia.

It is now an isolated and heavily militarized state.

Putin surely never thought it would turn out this way.

Moscow initially predicted Ukraine would fall within days of the invasion.

Russian forces were carrying three days’ worth of provisions and dress uniforms for the parade they expected to hold in Kyiv.

The embarrassing first year of the war exposed the weaknesses of the Russian armed forces, which turned out to be riddled with corruption and incompetence.

But as it has done throughout its history, Russia has stabilized the front, relying on old-fashioned tactics such as human wave attacks, trenches, and land mines.

The incremental way in which the United States and its allies supplied weapons to Ukraine—first debating whether to send tanks, then doing so, and so on—gave Moscow breathing room to mobilize its defense industrial base and throw its huge manpower advantage at the Ukrainians.

Great-power DNA is still very much in the American genome.

Still, the economic toll will haunt Moscow for years to come.

An estimated one million Russians fled their country in response to Putin’s war, many of them young and well educated.

Russia’s oil and gas industry has been crippled by the loss of important markets and the withdrawal of the multinational oil giants BP, Exxon, and Shell.

Russia’s talented central banker, Elvira Nabiullina, has covered up many of the economy’s vulnerabilities, walking a tightrope without access to the $300 billion in frozen Russian assets held in the West, and China has stepped in to take off some of the pressure.

But the cracks in the Russian economy are showing.

According to a report commissioned for Gazprom, the majority-state-owned energy giant, the company’s revenue will stay below its pre-war level for at least ten years thanks to the effects of the invasion.

Thoughtful economic players in Moscow are worried.

But Putin cannot lose this war, and he is willing to sacrifice everything to stave off disaster.

As Germany’s experience in the interwar period suggests, an isolated, militarized, declining power is exceedingly dangerous.

The challenge is complicated by Russia’s growing cooperation with China, Iran, and North Korea.

The four countries have a common cause: to undermine and replace the U.S.-led international system that they detest.

Still, it is worth noting that their strategic interests are not easy to harmonize.

Beijing cannot let Putin lose but likely has no real enthusiasm for his adventurism on behalf of a new Russian empire—particularly if it puts China in the cross hairs for secondary sanctions on its own struggling economy.

Meanwhile, the growth of Chinese power in Central Asia and beyond is not likely to warm the hearts of the xenophobes in the Kremlin.

China’s ambitions complicate Russia’s relations with India, a long-standing military partner that is now turning more toward the United States.

Russia’s dalliance with North Korea complicates its own relationship with South Korea—and China’s, as well.

Iran terrifies both Russia and China as it moves closer to developing a nuclear weapon.

Tehran’s proxies are a constant source of trouble in the Middle East: the Houthis endanger shipping in the Red Sea, Hamas recklessly launched a war with Israel, Hezbollah in Lebanon threatens to widen that war into a regional conflagration, and militias in Iraq and Syria that Tehran does not always seem to control have carried out attacks on U.S.

military personnel.

A nasty and unstable Middle East is not good for Russia or China.

And none of the three powers really trusts North Korea’s erratic leader, Kim Jong Un.

That said, international politics has always made for strange bedfellows when revisionist powers seek to undo the status quo.

And they can do a lot of collective damage despite their differences.

THE CRUMBLING ORDER The post–World War II liberal order was a direct response to the horrors of the interwar period.

The United States and its allies looked back on the economic depression and international aggression of the 1920s and 1930s and located the cause in beggar-thy-neighbor protectionism, currency manipulation, and violent quests for resources—for example, leading to the aggressive behavior by Imperial Japan in the Pacific.

The absence of the United States as a kind of offshore mediator also contributed to the breakdown of order.

The one effort to build a moderating institution after World War I, the League of Nations, proved to be a pathetic disgrace, covering aggression rather than confronting it.

Asian and European powers, left to their own devices, fell into catastrophic conflict.

After World War II, the United States and its allies built an economic order that was no longer zero-sum.

At the Bretton Woods conference, they laid the groundwork for the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (the predecessor of the World Trade Organization), which together promoted the free movement of goods and services and stimulated international economic growth.

For the most part, it was a wildly successful strategy.

Global GDP grew and grew, surpassing the $100 trillion mark in 2022.

The companion to this “economic commons” was a “security commons” that was also led by the United States.

Washington committed to the defense of Europe through NATO’s Article 5, which, after the Soviet Union’s successful nuclear test in 1949, essentially meant pledging to trade New York for London or Washington for Bonn.

A similar U.S.

commitment to Japan allowed that country to replace the legacy of its hated imperial military with self-defense forces and a “peace constitution,” easing relations with its neighbors.

By 1953, South Korea also had a U.S.

security guarantee, ensuring peace on the Korean Peninsula.

As the United Kingdom and France stepped back from the Middle East after the 1956 Suez crisis, the United States became the guarantor of freedom of navigation in the region and, in time, its major stabilizing force.

U.S.

and British troops near Nurmsi, Estonia, May 2024 Ints Kalnins / Reuters Today’s international system is not yet a throwback to the early twentieth century.

The death of globalization is often overstated, but the rush to pursue onshoring, near-shoring, and “friend shoring,” largely in reaction to China, does portend a weakening of integration.

The United States has been largely absent from negotiations on trade for almost a decade now.

It’s hard to recall the last time that an American politician gave a spirited defense of free trade.

The new consensus raises the question: Can the aspiration for the freer movement of goods and services survive the United States’ absence from the game? Globalization will continue in some form.

But the sense that it is a positive force has lost steam.

Consider the way countries acted in response to 9/11 versus how they acted in response to the pandemic.

After 9/11, the world united in tackling terrorism, a problem that almost every country was experiencing in some form.

Within a few weeks of the attack, the UN Security Council unanimously passed a resolution allowing the tracking of terrorist financing across borders.

Countries quickly harmonized their airport security standards.

The United States soon joined with other countries to create the Proliferation Security Initiative, a forum for sharing information on suspicious cargo that would grow to include over 100 member states.

Fast-forward to 2020, and the world saw the revenge of the sovereign state.

International institutions were compromised, the chief example being the World Health Organization, which had grown too close to China.

Travel restrictions, bans on the export of protective gear, and claims on vaccines complicated the road to recovery.

With the growing chasm between the United States and its allies on one side and China and Russia on the other, it is hard to imagine this trend reversing.

Economic integration, which after the collapse of the Soviet Union was thought to be a common project for growth and peace, has given way to a zero-sum quest for territory, markets, and innovation.

St

</CONTENT>
