<TITLE>Ukraine Holds the Future: The War Between Democracy and Nihilism</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2024-02-27</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.foreignaffairs.com/ukraine/ukraine-war-democracy-nihilism-timothy-snyder?utm_medium=social</URL>
<AUTHOR>Timothy Snyder</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
The article argues that the war in Ukraine is a struggle between democracy and nihilism, with a Ukrainian victory upholding self-rule and a Russian victory strengthening authoritarianism.
-  The article draws historical parallels between ancient Athenian democracy and Ukraine's own history, highlighting Ukraine's longstanding connection to the region and its use of the trident as a national symbol.
-  Key historical events mentioned include the founding of Kyiv by Vikings, the adoption of Christianity, the rise and fall of Ukrainian republics, and the devastating famine orchestrated by Stalin.
-  The article also emphasizes the geopolitical importance of Ukraine's grain exports and the potential for global consequences if Russia's blockade continues.
- Ultimately, the author posits that this war determines principles for the 21st century and the possibility of a democratic future.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- Former advisers to Trump and President Barack Obama disagreed with me in a class at Yale University, where I teach.
- They were doing nothing more than reflecting the American consensus.
- Americans tend to see the war in Ukraine in the long shadow of the 9/11 attacks and the American moral and military failures that followed.
- In the Biden administration, officials feared that taking the side of Kyiv risked repeating the fall of Kabul.
- Among younger people and on the political left, a deeper unease arose from the lack of a national reckoning over the invasion of Iraq, justified at the time with the notion that destroying one regime would create a tabula rasa from which democracy would naturally emerge.

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
Russia, an aging tyranny, seeks to destroy Ukraine, a defiant democracy.

A Ukrainian victory would confirm the principle of self-rule, allow the integration of Europe to proceed, and empower people of goodwill to return reinvigorated to other global challenges.

A Russian victory, by contrast, would extend genocidal policies in Ukraine, subordinate Europeans, and render any vision of a geopolitical European Union obsolete.

Should Russia continue its illegal blockade of the Black Sea, it could starve Africans and Asians, who depend on Ukrainian grain, precipitating a durable international crisis that will make it all but impossible to deal with common threats such as climate change.

A Russian victory would strengthen fascists and other tyrants, as well as nihilists who see politics as nothing more than a spectacle designed by oligarchs to distract ordinary citizens from the destruction of the world.

This war, in other words, is about establishing principles for the twenty-first century.

It is about policies of mass death and about the meaning of life in politics.

It is about the possibility of a democratic future.

Discussions of democracy often begin with the ancient city-states of Greece.

According to the Athenian legend of origin, the deities Poseidon and Athena offered gifts to the citizens to win the status of patron.

Poseidon, the god of the sea, struck the ground with his trident, causing the earth to tremble and saltwater to spring forth.

He was offering Athenians the power of the sea and strength in war, but they blanched at the taste of brine.

Then Athena planted an olive seed, which sprouted into an olive tree.

It offered shade for contemplation, olives for eating, and oil for cooking.

Athena’s gift was deemed superior, and the city took her name and patronage.

The Greek legend suggests a vision of democracy as tranquility, a life of thoughtful deliberation and consumption.

Yet Athens had to win wars to survive.

The most famous defense of democracy, the funeral oration of Pericles, is about the harmony of risk and freedom.

Poseidon had a point about war: sometimes the trident must be brought down.

He was also making a case for interdependence.

Prosperity, and sometimes survival, depends on sea trade.

How, after all, could a small city-state such as Athens afford to devote its limited soil to olives? Ancient Athenians were nourished by grain brought from the north coast of the Black Sea, grown in the black earth of what is now southern Ukraine.

Alongside the Jews, the Greeks are the longest known continuous inhabitants of Ukraine.

Mariupol was their city, until the Russians destroyed it.

The southern region of Kherson, where combat is now underway, bears a Greek name borrowed from a Greek city.

In April, the Ukrainians sank the Russian flagship, the Moskva , with Neptune missiles—Neptune being the Roman name for Poseidon.

As it happens, Ukraine’s national symbol is the trident.

It can be found among relics of the state that Vikings founded at Kyiv about a thousand years ago.

After receiving Christianity from Byzantium, the Greek-speaking eastern Roman Empire, Kyiv’s rulers established secular law.

The economy shifted from slavery to agriculture as the people became subject to taxation rather than capture.

In subsequent centuries, after the fall of the Kyiv state, Ukrainian peasants were enserfed by Poles and then by Russians.

When Ukrainian leaders founded a republic in 1918, they revived the trident as the national symbol.

Independence meant not only freedom from bondage but the liberty to use the land as they saw fit.

Yet the Ukrainian National Republic was short lived.

Like several other young republics established after the end of the Russian empire in 1917, it was destroyed by the Bolsheviks, and its lands were incorporated into the Soviet Union.

Seeking to control Ukraine’s fertile soil, Joseph Stalin brought about a political famine that killed about four million inhabitants of Soviet Ukraine in 1932 and 1933.

Ukrainians were overrepresented in the Soviet concentration camps known as the gulag.

When Nazi Germany invaded the Soviet Union, Adolf Hitler’s goal was control of Ukrainian agriculture.

Ukrainians were again overrepresented among the civilian victims—this time of the German occupiers and the Red Army soldiers who defeated the Germans.

After World War II, Soviet Ukraine was nevertheless subjected to a slow process of Russification in which its culture was degraded.

When the Soviet Union came to an end in 1991, Ukrainians again seized on the trident as their national symbol.

In the three decades since, Ukraine has moved, haltingly but unmistakably, in the direction of functional democracy.

The generation that now runs the country knows the Soviet and pre-Soviet history but understands self-rule as self-evident.

At a time when democracy is in decline around the world and threatened in the United States, Ukrainian resistance to Russian aggression provides a surprising (to many) affirmation of faith in democracy’s principles and its future.

In this sense, Ukraine is a challenge to those in the West who have forgotten the ethical basis of democracy and thereby, wittingly or unwittingly, ceded the field to oligarchy and empire at home and abroad.

Ukrainian resistance is a welcome challenge, and a needed one.

THE APPEASEMENT TEST The history of twentieth-century democracy offers a reminder of what happens when this challenge is not met.

Like the period after 1991, the period after 1918 saw the rise and fall of democracy.

Today, the turning point (one way or the other) is likely Ukraine; in interwar Europe, it was Czechoslovakia.

Like Ukraine in 2022, Czechoslovakia in 1938 was an imperfect multilingual republic in a tough neighborhood.

In 1938 and 1939, after European powers chose to appease Nazi Germany at Munich, Hitler’s regime suppressed Czechoslovak democracy through intimidation, unresisted invasion, partition, and annexation.

What actually happened in Czechoslovakia was similar to what Russia seems to have planned for Ukraine.

Putin’s rhetoric resembles Hitler’s to the point of plagiarism: both claimed that a neighboring democracy was somehow tyrannical, both appealed to imaginary violations of minority rights as a reason to invade, both argued that a neighboring nation did not really exist and that its state was illegitimate.

In 1938, Czechoslovakia had decent armed forces, the best arms industry in Europe, and natural defenses improved by fortifications.

Nazi Germany might not have bested Czechoslovakia in an open war and certainly would not have done so quickly and easily.

Yet Czechoslovakia’s allies abandoned it, and its leaders fatefully chose exile over resistance.

The defeat was, in a crucial sense, a moral one.

And it enabled the physical transformation of a continent by war, creating some of the preconditions for the Holocaust of European Jews.

The war in Ukraine is a test of whether a tyranny that claims to be a democracy can triumph.

By the time Germany invaded Poland in September 1939, beginning World War II, Czechoslovakia no longer existed, and its territories and resources had been reassigned according to German preferences.

Germany now had a longer border with Poland, a larger population, Czechoslovak tanks, and tens of thousands of Slovak soldiers.

Hitler also now had a powerful ally in the Soviet Union, which joined in the destruction of Poland after invading from the east.

During Germany’s invasion of France and the Low Countries in 1940 and during the Battle of Britain later that year, German vehicles were fueled by Soviet oil and German soldiers fed by Soviet grain, almost all of which was extracted from Ukraine.

This sequence of events started with the easy German absorption of Czechoslovakia.

World War II , at least in the form that it took, would have been impossible had the Czechoslovaks fought back.

No one can know what would have happened had the Germans been bogged down in Bohemia in 1938.

But we can be confident that Hitler would not have had the sense of irresistible momentum that gained him allies and frightened his foes.

It would certainly have been harder for the Soviet leadership to justify an alliance.

Hitler would not have been able to use Czechoslovak arms in his assault on Poland, which would have begun later, if at all.

The United Kingdom and France would have had more time to prepare for war and perhaps to help Poland.

By 1938, Europe was emerging from the Great Depression, which was the main force attracting people to the political extremes.

Had Hitler’s nose been bloodied in his first campaign, the appeal of the far right might have declined.

POSTMODERN TYRANTS Unlike Czechoslovak leaders, Ukrainian leaders chose to fight and were supported, at least in some measure, by other democracies.

In resisting, Ukrainians have staved off a number of very dark scenarios and bought European and North American democracies valuable time to think and prepare.

The full significance of the Ukrainian resistance of 2022, as with the appeasement of 1938, can be grasped only when one considers the futures it opens or forecloses.

And to do that, one needs the past to make sense of the present.

The classical notion of tyranny and the modern concept of fascism are both helpful in understanding the Putin regime, but neither is sufficient.

The basic weaknesses of tyrannies are generic and long known—recorded, for example, by Plato in his Republic .

Tyrants resist good advice, become obsessive as they age and fall ill, and wish to leave an undying legacy.

All of this is certainly evident in Putin’s decision to invade Ukraine.

Fascism, a specific form of tyranny, also helps to explain today’s Russia, which is characterized by a cult of personality, a de facto single party, mass propaganda, the privileging of will over reason, and a politics of us-versus-them.

Because fascism places violence over reason, it can be defeated only by force.

Fascism was quite popular—and not just in fascist countries—until the end of World War II.

It was discredited only because Germany and Italy lost the war.

Putin in St.

Petersburg, Russia, January 2020 Dmitri Lovetsky / Pool / Reuters Although Russia is fascist at the top, it is not fascist through and through.

A specific emptiness lies at the center of Putin’s regime.

It is the emptiness in the eyes of Russian officials in photographs as they look into a vacant middle distance, a habit they believe projects masculine imperturbability.

Putin’s regime functions not by mobilizing society with the help of a single grand vision, as fascist Germany and Italy did, but by demobilizing individuals, assuring them that there are no certainties and no institutions that can be trusted.

This habit of demobilization has been a problem for Russian leaders during the war in Ukraine because they have educated their citizens to watch television rather than take up arms.

Even so, the nihilism that undergirds demobilization poses a direct threat to democracy.

The Putin regime is imperialist and oligarchic, dependent for its existence on propaganda that claims that all the world is ever such.

While Russia’s support of fascism, white nationalism, and chaos brings it a certain kind of supporter, its bottomless nihilism is what attracts citizens of democracies who are not sure where to find ethical landmarks—who have been taught, on the right, that democracy is a natural consequence of capitalism or, on the left, that all opinions are equally valid.

The gift of Russian propagandists has been to take things apart, to peel away the layers of the onion until nothing is left but the tears of others and their own cynical laughter.

Russia won the propaganda war the last time it invaded Ukraine , in 2014, targeting vulnerable Europeans and Americans on social media with tales of Ukrainians as Nazis, Jews, feminists, and gays.

But much has changed since then: a generation of younger Ukrainians has come to power that communicates better than the older Russians in the Kremlin.

The defense of Putin’s regime has been offered by people operating as literary critics, ever disassembling and dissembling.

Ukrainian resistance, embodied by President Volodymyr Zelensky , has been more like literature: careful attention to art, no doubt, but for the purpose of articulating values.

If all one has is literary criticism, one accepts that everything melts into air and concedes the values that make democratic politics possible.

But when one has literature, one experiences a certain solidity, a sense that embodying values is more interesting and more courageous than dismissing or mocking them.

Tyrants resist good advice.

Creation comes before critique and outlasts it; action is better than ridicule.

As Pericles put it, “We rely not upon management or trickery, but upon our own hearts and hands.” The contrast between the sly black suits of the Russian ideologues and propagandists and the earnest olive tones of Ukrainian leaders and soldiers calls to mind one of the most basic requirements of democracy: individuals must openly assert values despite the risk attendant upon doing so.

The ancient philosophers understood that virtues were as important as material factors to the rise and fall of regimes.

The Greeks knew that democracy could yield to oligarchy, the Romans knew that republics could become empires, and both knew that such transformations were moral as well as institutional.

This knowledge is at the foundation of Western literary and philosophical traditions.

As Aristotle recognized, truth was both necessary to democracy and vulnerable to propaganda.

Every revival of democracy, including the American one of 1776 with its self-evident truths, has depended on ethical assertions: not that democracy was bound to exist, but that it should exist, as an expression of rebellious ethical commitment against the ubiquitous gravitational forces of oligarchy and empire.

This has been true of every revival of democracy except for the most recent one, which followed the eastern European revolutions of 1989 and the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991.

At that point, as Russia and Ukraine emerged as independent states, a perverse faith was lodged in “the end of history,” the lack of alternatives to democracy, and the nature of capitalism.

Many Americans had lost the natural fear of oligarchy and empire (their own or others’) and forgotten the organic connection of democracy to ethical commitment and physical courage.

Late twentieth-century talk of democracy conflated the correct moral claim that the people should rule with the incorrect factual claim that democracy is the natural state of affairs or the inevitable condition of a favored nation.

This misunderstanding made democracies vulnerable, whether old or new.

The current Russian regime is one consequence of the mistaken belief that democracy happens naturally and that all opinions are equally valid.

If this were true, then Russia would indeed be a democracy, as Putin claims.

The war in Ukraine is a test of whether a tyranny that claims to be a democracy can triumph and thereby spread its logical and ethical vacuum.

Those who took democracy for granted were sleepwalking toward tyranny.

The Ukrainian resistance is the wake-up call.

EARNEST STRUGGLE On the Sunday before Russia began its latest invasion of Ukraine, I predicted on American television that Zelensky would remain in Kyiv if Russia invaded.

I was mocked for this prediction, just as I was when I predicted the previous Russian invasion, the danger that U.S.

President Donald Trump posed to American democracy, and Trump’s coup attempt.

Former advisers to Trump and President Barack Obama disagreed with me in a class at Yale University, where I teach.

They were doing nothing more than reflecting the American consensus.

Americans tend to see the war in Ukraine in the long shadow of the 9/11 attacks and the American moral and military failures that followed.

In the Biden administration, officials feared that taking the side of Kyiv risked repeating the fall of Kabul.

Among younger people and on the political left, a deeper unease arose from the lack of a national reckoning over the invasion of Iraq, justified at the time with the notion that destroying one regime would create a tabula rasa from which democracy would naturally emerge.

The idiocy of this argument made a generation doubt the possibility that war and democracy could have something to do with each other.

The unease with another military effort was perhaps understandable, but the resemblance between Iraq and Ukraine was only superficial.

Ukrainians weren’t imposing their own vision on another country.

They were protecting their right to choose their own leaders against an invasion designed to undo their democracy and eliminate their society.

The Trump administration had spread cynicism from the other direction.

First Trump denied Ukraine weapons in order to blackmail Zelensky.

Then he showed that a U.S.

president would attempt a coup to stay in power after an electoral defeat.

To watch fellow citizens die in an attempt to overthrow democracy is the opposite of risking one’s life to protect it.

Of course, if democracy is only about larger forces and not about ethics, then Trump’s actions would make perfect sense.

If one believes that capitalist selfishness automatically becomes democratic virtue, and that lying about who won an election is just expressing an opinion like any other, then Trump is a normal politician.

In fact, he brazenly personifies the Russian idea that there are no values and no truth.

Americans had largely forgotten that democracy is a value for which an elected official—or a citizen, for that matter—might choose to live or die.

By taking a risk, Zelensky transformed his role from that of a bit player in a Trump scandal to a hero of democracy.

Americans assumed that he would want to flee because they had convinced themselves of the supremacy of impersonal forces: if they bring democracy, so much the better, but when they don’t, people submit.

“I need ammunition, not a ride” was Zelensky’s response to U.S.

urgings to leave Kyiv.

This was perhaps not as eloquent as the funeral oration of Pericles, but it gets across the same point: there is honor in choosing the right way to die on behalf of a people seeking the right way to live.

For 30 years, too many Americans took for granted that democracy was something that someone else did—or rather, that something else did: history by ending, alternatives by disappearing, capitalism by some inexplicable magic.

(Russia and China are capitalist, after all.) That era ended when Zelensky emerged one night in February to film himself saying, “The president is here.” If a leader believes that democracy is just a result of larger factors, then he will flee when those larger factors seem to be against him.

The issue of responsibility will never arise.

But democracy demands “earnest struggle,” as the American abolitionist Frederick Douglass said.

Ukrainian resistance to what appeared to be overwhelming force reminded the world that democracy is not about accepting the apparent verdict of history.

It is about making history; striving toward human values despite the weight of empire, oligarchy, and propaganda; and, in so doing, revealing previously unseen possibilities.

“LIVING IN TRUTH” On the surface, Zelensky’s simple truth that “the president is here” was meant to undo Russian propaganda, which was claiming that he had fled the city.

But the video, shot in the open air as Kyiv was under attack, was also a recovery of the meaning of freedom of speech, which has been forgotten.

The Greek playwright Euripides understood that the purpose of freedom of speech was to speak truth to power.

The free speaker clarifies a dangerous world not only with what he says but by the risk he takes when he speaks.

By saying “the president is here” as the bombs fell and the assassins approached, Zelensky was “livin

</CONTENT>
