<TITLE>The New Battle for the Middle East: Saudi Arabia and Iran’s Clash of Visions</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2024-10-31</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.foreignaffairs.com/middle-east/new-battle-saudi-arabia-iran-sadjadpour</URL>
<AUTHOR>Karim Sadjadpour</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
Saudi Arabia and Iran are locked in a struggle for regional dominance, driven by differing ideological visions.
-  Saudi Arabia's Vision 2030 aims for modernization and economic diversification, while Iran's Vision 1979 prioritizes upholding its Islamist revolution.
-  Both countries are autocratic energy powers, but Saudi Arabia's Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman faces challenges from economic volatility and internal dissent, while Iran's Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei faces economic stagnation and internal instability.
-  Despite a recent normalization agreement, the two nations' rivalry remains a key factor in Middle Eastern politics and is likely to have global implications.
-  The success of either nation's vision remains uncertain.
-  Iran's influence extends through proxies in several Middle Eastern countries, including Iraq, Lebanon, Syria, and Yemen.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- The government began investing tens of billions of dollars in plans for data centers and in artificial intelligence and other types of technology.
- It dramatically boosted youth entertainment—nearly two-thirds of Saudis are under 30—with Formula 1 races, wrestling tournaments, and the recruitment of soccer stars such as Cristiano Ronaldo.
- New tourist rules were introduced to encourage foreign visitors to explore the country and bring in revenue.
- So far, these efforts have had mixed results.
- Saudi Arabia has been among the world’s fastest-growing major economies in the last several years, with significant growth in non-oil sectors.

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
There are many Middle Eastern conflicts that could reshape the global political order.

But the one most likely to do so is the battle between the region’s two dominant powers: the kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the Islamic Republic of Iran.

Although this rivalry was once primarily viewed as an ethnic and sectarian conflict between the predominantly Sunni Arab Saudis and the Shiite Persian Iranians, the key dividing line today is ideological.

The clash centers on their respective strategic visions—Saudi Arabia’s Vision 2030 and Iran’s Vision 1979.

Each vision dictates the internal policies of its respective country, as well as how it deals with others.

Iran and Saudi Arabia are both autocratic energy titans, collectively controlling nearly a third of the world’s oil reserves and a fifth of its natural gas.

Yet they are led by starkly different men with profoundly different plans.

The de facto leader of Saudi Arabia, 39-year-old Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman, known as MBS, wants to rapidly modernize a state long steeped in Islamist orthodoxy and move it away from its dependence on fossil fuel production.

He created Vision 2030 to achieve those ends.

The longtime leader of Iran, 85-year-old Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei, remains dedicated to the ideological principles of Iran’s Islamist revolution.

Khamenei does not call his plan Vision 1979.

But the name can still aptly be applied, since his vision is all about preserving the Iranian Revolution’s ruthless commitment to theocracy.

These two countries are historic rivals with irreconcilable goals.

Vision 2030 appeals to national aspirations, whereas Vision 1979 taps into national grievances.

Vision 2030 seeks a security alliance with the United States and normalization with Israel; Vision 1979 is premised on resisting the former and eradicating the latter.

Vision 2030 is propelled by social liberalization; Vision 1979 is anchored in social repression.

Although they harbor enormous mutual mistrust, Iran and Saudi Arabia are unlikely to fight each other directly.

Tehran and Riyadh struck a 2023 agreement to normalize relations, lowering bilateral tensions.

Their greatest challenge thus lies not in confronting each other but in addressing their internal struggles.

And here, both have plenty to grapple with.

The Islamic Republic of Iran’s problems are obvious.

The country resembles the late-stage Soviet Union, economically and ideologically bankrupt and reliant on brutality for its survival.

Beyond its borders, however, Tehran is more powerful than ever before in its modern history.

Iranian-backed proxies and militias dominate four failing Arab states—Iraq, Lebanon, Syria, and Yemen—as well as Gaza.

Tehran also has an outsize effect on numerous global security issues, including nuclear proliferation, Russia’s war in Ukraine , cybersecurity, disinformation campaigns, and the weaponization of energy resources.

Saudi Arabia’s struggles are not as immediately apparent.

Right now, MBS appears to enjoy widespread support for having lifted social restrictions and for his country’s strong economy.

Yet the success of Vision 2030 will invariably depend on the economic viability of its gigantic projects, and it will be challenged by lofty public expectations, oil price volatility, corruption, and repression.

It will also be tested by disgruntled reactionary forces.

The country still has a large population of deeply conservative Islamists who are unhappy with MBS’s choices, and they could create major problems for his government.

Vision 2030, then, is a high-risk, high-reward endeavor.

Whether either state will succeed in sustaining its vision is not clear.

What is clear is that the fate of the two visions—one driven by change, the other defined by resistance—will have consequences that extend far beyond either country.

These visions will shape not only whether the Middle East becomes more prosperous and stable but whether the whole world does, as well.

THE LEGACY OF 1979 Saudi officials like to tell a story about their country and Iran.

In the late 1960s, Shah Mohammed Reza Pahlavi, Iran’s modernizing ruler, wrote to King Faisal of Saudi Arabia.

Faisal, the shah wrote, had to liberalize Saudi Arabia.

Otherwise, he might be overthrown.

The king strenuously disagreed.

In his response, Faisal suggested that it was Pahlavi—with his secular, more European vision for society—who was actually at risk of being deposed.

“Your majesty, may I remind you, you are not the shah of France,” he wrote back, adding: “Your population is 90 percent Muslim.

Please don’t forget that.’’ The king proved to be right.

In Iran’s 1979 revolution, protesters deposed Pahlavi and transformed the country from a U.S.-allied monarchy into an anti-American theocracy.

Although a diverse coalition of forces opposed the shah, the man who emerged as the leader of the revolution, the 76-year-old Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, believed that Western political and cultural influence posed an existential threat to Iran and Islamic civilization.

“All the things they used to pervert our youth were gifts from the West,” the cleric said.

“Their plan was to devise the means to pervert both our men and our women, to corrupt them and thus prevent them from their human development.” Khomeini died a decade later, but his successor, Khamenei, has kept his vision alive.

As it happened, 1979 was also a pivotal year for Saudi Arabia.

Islamist radicals, believing the Saudi royal family had strayed from the path of true Islam, seized the Grand Mosque in Mecca, helping to plunge the monarchy into an existential crisis.

Fearing that they would suffer the same fate as the shah, the Saudi government abandoned modernization efforts and redirected vast resources to reactionary forces at home and abroad.

The country empowered fundamentalist clerics to exercise control over education and the judiciary, expanded the morality police, shut down movie theaters, and enforced strict gender segregation in schools and public spaces.

In exporting these policies, in part with U.S.

encouragement to counter the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, Saudi Arabia spent tens of billions of dollars to fund thousands of mosques as well as jihadi groups that became the antecedents of the Taliban and al Qaeda.

Iran and Saudi Arabia are led by starkly different men with profoundly different plans.

These policies endured for 20 years.

But the 9/11 attacks on the United States in 2001—15 of the 19 hijackers were Saudi nationals—and the deadly al Qaeda bombings in Riyadh in 2003 forced a course correction.

Both attacks exposed a harsh reality: Islamic fundamentalism, once perceived as an asset, had evolved into a profound threat to the kingdom’s stability.

The Saudi government thus attempted to turn off its financial support for external radicalism as well as embark on a costly domestic counter-radicalization campaign.

“We try to transform each detainee from a young man who wants to die into a young man who wants to live,” said Prince Mohammed bin Nayef, then one of the key architects of the Saudi counterterrorism strategy, in 2007.

But it was not until more than a decade later, when MBS began his ascent to power, that Saudi Arabia commenced its broader, international transformation.

One of more than a dozen children born to King Salman, MBS saw an aging Saudi leadership that was overly reliant on oil and disconnected from its young society.

He worried his country was falling behind Qatar and the United Arab Emirates, which were working to become transportation and trade hubs with outsize influence in business, entertainment, sports, and media.

In response, MBS had the kingdom launch its own agenda, Vision 2030, aimed at opening the country economically, jettisoning Islamist restrictions, diversifying away from oil, and building a national identity.

The vision’s foundational document is centered on three themes—“a vibrant society, a thriving economy, and an ambitious nation”—and has led to real policy shifts.

Beginning in 2018, Saudi women gained the right to drive and travel without a male guardian’s permission.

Their presence in the country’s labor force increased significantly, including in senior government positions.

The government began investing tens of billions of dollars in plans for data centers and in artificial intelligence and other types of technology.

It dramatically boosted youth entertainment—nearly two-thirds of Saudis are under 30—with Formula 1 races, wrestling tournaments, and the recruitment of soccer stars such as Cristiano Ronaldo.

New tourist rules were introduced to encourage foreign visitors to explore the country and bring in revenue.

So far, these efforts have had mixed results.

Saudi Arabia has been among the world’s fastest-growing major economies in the last several years, with significant growth in non-oil sectors.

Yet growth figures are still often tied to the price of oil.

Similarly, the Saudi Ministry of Investment has estimated that foreign direct investment increased by over 150 percent from 2017 to 2023.

One Saudi businessman, however, told me that “non-oil FDI has gone nowhere.” TWO MEN, TWO VISIONS Vision 1979 and Vision 2030 reflect the personalities of Khamenei and MBS.

The two men are arguably the most powerful individuals in today’s Middle East, but they have vastly different visions and leadership styles—the former’s based on historic grievances, and the latter’s on modern ambitions.

These differences are clear in their animosity toward each other.

MBS has called Khamenei the “new Hitler of the Middle East,” and Khamenei has derided MBS as a “criminal” whose “inexperience” will lead to Saudi Arabia’s downfall.

Both have unique backstories.

Khamenei was born into a clerical family of modest means, was educated in a Shiite seminary, and spent his formative years as a revolutionary agitator (including several as a political prisoner).

Had the Iranian Revolution never happened, he would have been destined for the life of a humble cleric.

Instead, he was catapulted to power, becoming Iran’s president in 1981 and supreme leader in 1989.

His hypervigilance, born of profound insecurity, has been one of the keys to his longevity.

Despite widespread popular discontent and a state of near-permanent external crisis, Khamenei has not deviated from the revolutionary ideals of his mentor, Khomeini.

The ideological pillars of Iran’s Vision 1979 remain as they were then: “Death to America, Death to Israel,” as Khamenei’s supporters often chant, and the mandatory veiling of women, which Khomeini once referred to as “the flag of the Islamic Revolution.” In stark contrast, MBS was born into immense wealth as a son of one of the world’s richest men, King Salman bin Abdulaziz.

Although MBS was born after 1979, he said that the radicalism spawned that year “hijacked” Islam as a religion.

He aspires for his people to achieve modernity rather than martyrdom.

“We will not waste 30 years of our lives dealing with extremist ideas,” he once declared.

“We will destroy them today.’’ This decisiveness has sometimes led to grave misjudgments, including the brutal 2018 murder of the journalist Jamal Khashoggi and the devasting war in Yemen .

Yet the crown prince has retained the confidence of much of young Saudi society and the momentum of Vision 2030.

One of the most important differences between the Saudi vision and the Iranian one relates to social freedoms.

Iranians had long looked down on their Gulf Arab neighbors.

Khomeini once referred to the House of Saud as “the followers of the camel grazers of Riyadh and the barbarians of Najd, the most infamous and the wildest members of the human family,” and he denounced them in his last will and testament.

No matter how reactionary their regime was, Iranians may have taken some comfort in having more social freedoms than Saudis.

But this is no longer the case.

The world’s most famous musicians regularly perform in Saudi Arabia, including top Iranian singers whose music is banned in their homeland.

Tens of millions of Iranians get their news from Iran International, a Saudi-backed Persian-language satellite news channel.

After a 35-year ban, Saudi Arabia reopened movie theaters in 2018.

Social media apps are widely available.

The country has welcomed more tourists than ever before, while Iran has doubled down on the practice of taking foreigners (often Iranian dual nationals) as hostages.

The difference between the two plans is particularly stark when it comes to the treatment of women.

Although Saudi women, once hidden from public life, continue to lag on indices of equality, the advances they have made under MBS are real and significant.

Iranian women are better educated than their male counterparts and have often risen to the top of their professions.

Yet they are among the few in the world who face more restrictions today than their grandmothers did five decades ago, before the Islamic Revolution.

This imbalance erupted during Iran’s 2022 to 2023 “Women, Life, Freedom” protests, which were triggered by the death in police custody of Mahsa Amini, a 22-year-old woman.

She had been arrested for allegedly wearing her hijab improperly.

CRUDE POWER The most dramatic difference in outcomes between Vision 2030 and Vision 1979, however, is in the effect on each state’s economy.

Saudi Arabia has used its energy production to fuel its strategic vision.

As a result, the Saudis are far richer than their Iranian counterparts by virtually every metric.

Saudi Arabia has more than twice the GDP of Iran despite having less than half its population.

Iran’s annual inflation rate is consistently among the world’s highest, and Saudi Arabia’s is around two percent.

Riyadh has over $450 billion in foreign currency reserves, around 20 times what Tehran possesses.

There are many reasons for Iran’s terrible economic performance.

But they all relate to Vision 1979.

Thanks to its hostility toward the West, Iran has come under heavy sanctions that have crippled its foreign currency holdings and made it hard to sell its main two commodities, oil and gas.

In 1978, the year before the revolution, Iran was producing almost six million barrels of oil per day, roughly five million of which were exported.

Since the revolution, Iranian production and exports have averaged less than half these amounts.

Although Iran has the world’s second-largest reserves of natural gas, after Russia, it does not rank among the world’s top 15 exporters.

And Tehran has sought to use the energy resources it does have as a weapon.

In the aftermath of the Russian invasion of Ukraine, Iranian officials repeatedly reminded an energy-strapped Europe that “winter is coming’’ to try to threaten the continent’s leaders into acceding to Tehran’s nuclear demands.

Yet the greatest tragedy of Vision 1979 for Iran has been the waste not of its natural resources but of its human resources.

In 2014, Iran’s minister of science and technology claimed that the country’s annual brain drain—estimated at 150,000 people leaving annually—cost the economy a staggering $150 billion every year, more than four times its oil revenue from 2023.

In contrast, most of the estimated 70,000 Saudi students studying abroad return home when their studies are finished.

Vision 1979 often sees its country’s educated minds as a threat, but Vision 2030 treats them as an asset.

Saudi Arabia has spent heavily on ambitious plans to modernize its economy, such as on the introduction of smart cities.

That includes its Neom project, focused on creating a large urban area in the desert that could transform the kingdom into a global technology hub and drive economic diversification.

Although both governments have built strong surveillance states, Tehran’s technology innovations and investments have been employed mostly to repress its people, arm its proxies, and attack its enemies.

ORDER VS.

DISORDER Saudi Vision 2030 has clearly outperformed Iran’s Vision 1979 in advancing the economic well-being and satisfaction of citizens.

But when it comes to international influence, the story is very different.

The Middle East’s regional power vacuums and chronic instability are threats to Vision 2030, yet they have been boons to Vision 1979.

This difference makes sense.

Vision 2030 is contingent on building, whereas Vision 1979 is content with destroying.

The power vacuums and instability caused by the Lebanese civil war, the Iraq war, and the 2011 Arab Spring have thus all furthered Iranian ambitions, and Iranian influence has in turn deepened the disorder and chaos across the Arab world.

Although opinion polls have suggested that Saudi Arabia enjoys significantly more popular support than Iran in the Arab world, including in countries where Iran wields the most influence, Riyadh’s efforts to counter Tehran’s ambitions—using hard power, soft power, or financial co-optation—have largely failed.

Over the last two decades, Iran and Saudi Arabia have been on opposing sides of the deadliest conflicts in the Middle East.

The two have backed rival groups in Iraq, Syria, and Yemen, as well as in Lebanon and the Palestinian territories .

In each of these arenas, Iranian-backed hard power prevailed.

Saudi Arabia has largely opted out or been defeated.

The most humiliating of these defeats was in Yemen.

Between 2015 and 2019, Riyadh spent over $200 billion on a military intervention to counter the power grab of the Iranian-backed Houthis.

That intervention contributed to tens of thousands of civilian deaths.

Yet it failed to weaken the group.

Today, the Houthis, whose slogans wish death to America and Israel, not only remain entrenched in power but have also bottlenecked the global economy, diverting an estimated $200 billion in trade by harassing ships in the Red Sea (ostensibly to protest Israel’s war in Gaza).

As the Middle East’s lone theocracy, Iran uses Islamist radicalism as an asset.

Virtually all Shiite radicals, from Lebanon to Pakistan, are willing to fight for Iran.

Meanwhile, most Sunni radicals, including al Qaeda and the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, also known as ISIS, seek to overthrow the government of Saudi Arabia despite its Sunni lineage.

In fact, Tehran has proved willing and able to work with Sunni radical groups that share its opposition to Israel and the United States.

The current head of al Qaeda, Saif al-Adel, has resided mostly in Iran for two decades.

Israel is one of the biggest international points of contention between the two countries.

Vision 2030 is open to normalization with Israel, whereas Vision 1979 is opposed to Israel’s very existence.

Iran was the lone country in the world that explicitly praised Hamas’s invasion of Israel on October 7, 2023.

Although it remains unclear to what extent Tehran was involved in the planning of the operation, Iran funds most of Hamas’s military budget, so U.S.

officials have said Tehran is “broadly complicit.” The attack succeeded in delaying, and perhaps sabotaging, a Saudi-Israeli normalization agreement.

FRIENDS IN HIGH PLACES The outside countries that will likely play the greatest role in determining the fate of these two visions are the United States and China.

Vision 2030 needs Washington as an ally, but Vision 1979 wants it as an adversary.

Vision 2030 is contingent on U.S.

security support, while Vision 1979 cannot survive without Chinese economic support.

An estimated 90 percent of Iranian oil exports are bound for China.

Given Iran’s economic and strategic dependence on China, any U.S.

strategy to counter Tehran’s nuclear and regional ambitions will probably require some collaboration with Beijing.

There is reason to believe that such cooperation is possible despite Beijing and Washington’s global competition.

China and the United States ultimately have common interests in the region: namely, political stability and the free flow of trade and energy.

(Russia, by contrast, benefits from regional instability and tumult in the oil markets.) Yet the United States

</CONTENT>
