<TITLE>Trump campaign defends 'shoot through the fake news' comment</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2024-11-04</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/cwy9njyljrgo</URL>
<AUTHOR>Ana Faguy</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
Donald Trump's campaign defended his comments at a Pennsylvania rally where he said someone would have to "shoot through the fake news" to reach him.
-  Trump, complaining about bulletproof glass around him, said the media was "bloodsuckers" and "fake news," specifically criticizing ABC, CBS, and NBC.
-  The campaign spokesperson stated the comments were about threats against Trump, spurred by "dangerous rhetoric from Democrats," and that the media was in danger, needing protection.
-  The remarks follow a pattern of Trump criticizing the press, dating back to his 2016 campaign.
-  This incident also follows an assassination attempt against Trump in July, in which a bystander was killed.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- Donald Trump's campaign team has defended the Republican candidate for president after he said he would not mind if someone had to "shoot through the fake news" to reach him.
- Speaking at a rally in Pennsylvania on Sunday, while complaining about the bulletproof glass around him, he said: "To get me, somebody would have to shoot through the fake news - and I don't mind that so much".
- He also called the media "bloodsuckers".
- The attacks on the media are not new.
- Since arriving on the political scene nearly a decade ago, Trump has sometimes mocked reporters at his rallies.

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
Donald Trump's campaign team has defended the Republican candidate for president after he said he would not mind if someone had to "shoot through the fake news" to reach him.

Speaking at a rally in Pennsylvania on Sunday, while complaining about the bulletproof glass around him, he said: "To get me, somebody would have to shoot through the fake news - and I don't mind that so much".

He also called the media "bloodsuckers".

The attacks on the media are not new.

Since arriving on the political scene nearly a decade ago, Trump has sometimes mocked reporters at his rallies.

"I have a piece of glass over here, and I don't have a piece of glass there.

And I have this piece of glass here, but all we have really over here is the fake news," Trump said on Sunday, pointing out the glass around his lectern.

"And to get me somebody would have to shoot through the fake news.

And I don't mind that so much.

I don't mind that." Since an assassination attempt against Trump in Butler, Pennsylvania in July, the US Secret Service has positioned bulletproof glass around the former president at outdoor rallies.

An audience member was killed at that rally and a bullet grazed the former president's ear.

The Secret Service killed the gunman.

The president has previously complained about the new security measures, but Sunday's rally marked the first time he connected the security measures with his attacks on the press.

Earlier at the event, he said: "The media is so damn bad - it's unbelievable".

He specifically criticised certain news outlets.

"ABC, ABC, fake news, CBS, ABC, NBC," he said.

"These are, these are, in my opinion, in my opinion, these are seriously corrupt people." Following the rally, a campaign spokesman for Kamala Harris looked to highlight the contrast between the two presidential rivals - saying the Democratic candidate had been "talking about faith in church and doing good for our neighbours" while Trump made his comments.

Trump campaign spokesperson Steven Cheung later defended the comments, saying they were about the threats made against Trump.

"The president’s statement about protective glass placement has nothing to do with the media being harmed, or anything else," Cheung said.

"It was about threats against him that were spurred on by dangerous rhetoric from Democrats.

In fact, President Trump was stating that the media was in danger, in that they were protecting him and, therefore, were in great danger themselves, and should have had a glass protective shield." Since first running for president in 2016, Trump has repeatedly criticised the press - calling them "dishonest," "not good people," and "scum".

During the 2024 campaign, he has been accused of divisive rhetoric against his opponents more generally.

Rival Democrats have criticised him for railing at his rallies against "the enemy from within" - which Trump has said refers to "radical left lunatics" and a couple of Democratic lawmakers.

</CONTENT>
