<TITLE>Qasr al-Farid: The Lonely Castle of the ancient Nabateans</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2024-10-24</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.bbc.com/reel/video/p0jztdzw/qasr-al-farid-the-lonely-castle-of-the-ancient-nabateans</URL>
<AUTHOR></AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
This BBC Reel video features Alice Morrison visiting Hegra, the second city of the ancient Nabataean civilization.
-  The site, recently opened to the public, is now home to an international team of archaeologists studying the Nabataean people and their way of life.
-  Hegra is an important archaeological site revealing new insights into this historical culture.
-  The video is part of a broader series of travel and adventure segments from the BBC, focusing on various ancient historical and cultural sites around the world.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- 8 days ago Opening Bell How the iconic Indiana Jones became a video game Troy Baker, one of the best-known video game actors, talks about his most iconic character yet, Indiana Jones.
- 10 Jan 2025 Innovation An eating habit that helps you maintain a healthy weight How changing your eating habits can help you to maintain a healthy weight.
- 9 Jan 2025 Health Decoded Rami Malek loves a pub quiz Rami Malek tells the BBC's Graham Norton that he's a big fan of British pub culture, especially a quiz night.
- 8 Jan 2025 Film &amp; TV Meta ending fact-checking 'a political play' - 8 Jan 2025 Expert says Meta's new policy to end third party fact-checking on its platforms is a political play.
- 8 Jan 2025 Opening Bell How foxes outsmart world's heaviest raptor in quest for food Watch red foxes challenge the Steller's sea eagle, the world's heaviest raptor, as they search for food in Japan.

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
Adventurer and writer Alice Morrison visits the ancient Nabatean civilisation's second city, Hegra, established as their influence spread.

The archaeological site of Hegra has only recently opened up to the world and is now host to an international team of experts making new discoveries about who the Nabateans were and how they lived.

24 October 2024 Adventures Ancient history Archaeology Explore More Visiting one of Europe's 'well preserved ancient cities' 5 days ago Adventures How Madeira is balancing natural beauty and tourism boom 18 Nov 2024 Adventures Puglia's elders keeping a pasta tradition alive 4 Nov 2024 Adventures A look at life as a traditional nomad in Mongolia 28 Oct 2024 Adventures Mongolia's fascinating Soviet history 22 Oct 2024 Adventures Saving Vietnam's endangered langur monkeys 15 Oct 2024 Adventures Vietnam: Visiting Hanoi's oldest food market 8 Oct 2024 Adventures Reviving Madeira's stunning walking paths 29 Sep 2024 Adventures Mexico revives a 3,000-year-old ball game 9 Nov 2023 Adventures The first person to cycle the globe on a penny-farthing 9 Nov 2023 Adventures Around the world in 20 days...

in a balloon 9 Nov 2023 Adventures Sanatan Shastar Vidya: The ancient Indian battlefield art 9 Nov 2023 Adventures Washington DC's biggest myths and mysteries debunked Robert Pohl, author and veteran tour guide, explains what's behind the US capital's most famous urban legends.

15 hrs ago The Travel Show How technology can monitor and improve our health BBC Click visits CES 2025 to find out about the latest health tech, from medical tools to well-being devices.

1 day ago Innovation Meet the world's first recipient of an AI-powered bionic arm Sarah De Lagarde lost an arm and a leg after being hit by two trains in London.

Now, she has an AI-powered arm.

1 day ago AI v the Mind How a performance lab is putting musicians to the test BBC Click visits a simulator lab that allows musicians to practice performance in real-world conditions.

1 day ago Innovation Bank performance signals boost to US economy - 16 Jan 2025 Jason Betz from Ameriprise Financial says that there is untapped resilience in the American economy.

2 days ago Opening Bell A mother tiger on a fierce hunt to feed her cubs While her three offspring take a leisurely bath, this Bengal tiger mother must find food for the entire family.

2 days ago Earth Why new habits are so hard to stick to Dr Radha Modgil explains what's going on in our brains when we try to make or break habits.

3 days ago Humans US shares open higher after new PPI reading - 14 Jan 2025 US shares opened higher after the Producer Price Index rose at a slower-than-expected pace in December.

4 days ago Opening Bell Tom Hiddleston busts out signature dance move Tom Hiddleston gives a demo of his signature move, which he calls 'just keep swimming'.

4 days ago Theatre Whitney White on how Shakespeare still resonates today Tony-nominated theatre maker Whitney White reimagines Shakespeare's plays by infusing them with gospel and rock.

5 days ago Arts in Motion The microbe that could protect humans from space radiation 'Conan the Bacterium' is the most radiation resistant bacteria in the world.

Now, scientists know why.

7 days ago World of wonder US stocks under pressure after jobs report - 10 Jan 2025 The latest healthy US jobs report adds more uncertainty about whether the Fed will cut its key interest rate.

8 days ago Opening Bell How the iconic Indiana Jones became a video game Troy Baker, one of the best-known video game actors, talks about his most iconic character yet, Indiana Jones.

10 Jan 2025 Innovation An eating habit that helps you maintain a healthy weight How changing your eating habits can help you to maintain a healthy weight.

9 Jan 2025 Health Decoded Rami Malek loves a pub quiz Rami Malek tells the BBC's Graham Norton that he's a big fan of British pub culture, especially a quiz night.

8 Jan 2025 Film &amp; TV Meta ending fact-checking 'a political play' - 8 Jan 2025 Expert says Meta's new policy to end third party fact-checking on its platforms is a political play.

8 Jan 2025 Opening Bell How foxes outsmart world's heaviest raptor in quest for food Watch red foxes challenge the Steller's sea eagle, the world's heaviest raptor, as they search for food in Japan.

8 Jan 2025 Earth America's last Revolutionaries: Rare photos of US patriots How a dwindling group of veterans from the American War of Independence were featured in early photographic form.

7 Jan 2025 History Report says Trump plans less aggressive tariffs - 6 Jan 2025 President-elect Donald Trump has called reports that he could adopt pared-back tariffs as 'fake news'.

6 Jan 2025 Opening Bell Homo juluensis: Possible 'new ancient human' identified Researchers may have identified a new human species that lived around 300,000 years ago in Asia.

6 Jan 2025 Science

</CONTENT>
