<TITLE>Han Zheng: The Chinese leader attending Trump's inauguration?</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2025-01-17</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/c62666dl4r0o</URL>
<AUTHOR>Kelly Ng</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
Vice President Han Zheng of China will attend US President-elect Donald Trump's inauguration, marking the first time a senior Chinese leader has witnessed a US presidential swearing-in.
-  This is a departure from tradition, as previous Chinese presidents sent representatives.
-  Trump invited Chinese President Xi Jinping, but sent an invitation instead.
-  The decision to send Han is likely an attempt by Trump to influence Xi Jinping and create a unique relationship.
-  Analysts suggest the visit could be a sign of desire for deal-making, but not to be overly reliant on Trump.
-  Previous Chinese vice-presidents have attended inaugurations in other countries, while Xi has always sent a representative.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- And his predecessor, Wang Qishan, was present for the inauguration of Philippine President Ferdinand Marcos Jr in 2022 and Brazil's President Lula da Silva in 2023.
- Xi's decision to send Han to the US is a sign that he "wants to get Trump into deal-making mode, but [he] does not want to be a supporting actor in the Trump show on January 20," says Neil Thomas, a fellow in Chinese politics at the Asia Society Policy Institute.
- Other foreign leaders that have been invited to the inauguration include Argentinian President Javier Milei and Italian Prime Minister Giorgia Meloni.
- Trump's spokesperson Karoline Leavitt told US media that the invitation to Xi was an "example of Trump creating an open dialogue with leaders of countries that are not just our allies but our adversaries and our competitors".
- It also could be an attempt by Trump to show the world "he has the ability to influence Xi's decision-making and they have a special relationship", says Yun Sun, the director of the China program at the Stimson Center in Washington.

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
China is sending Vice-President Han Zheng to US President-elect Donald Trump's inauguration on Monday - the first time a senior Chinese leader will witness a US president being sworn in.

Trump had invited Chinese President Xi Jinping, among other leaders - a break with tradition given foreign leaders traditionally do not attend US presidential inaugurations.

China has said it wants to work with the new US government to "find the right way for the two countries to get along with each other in the new era".

But Beijing is also preparing for a Trump presidency that is expected to include new tariffs on Chinese-made imports and more combative rhetoric - Marco Rubio, the nominee for Secretary of State, has described China as "the largest, most advanced adversary America has ever faced".

As president, Xi has never attended an inauguration or coronation ceremony, choosing instead to send a representative on his behalf.

The Chinese ambassador to the US attended the last two presidential inaugurations, in 2017 and 2021.

Beijing has sent vice-presidents to such ceremonies elsewhere, though - Han attended Indonesian President Prabowo Subianto's inauguration in October.

And his predecessor, Wang Qishan, was present for the inauguration of Philippine President Ferdinand Marcos Jr in 2022 and Brazil's President Lula da Silva in 2023.

Xi's decision to send Han to the US is a sign that he "wants to get Trump into deal-making mode, but [he] does not want to be a supporting actor in the Trump show on January 20," says Neil Thomas, a fellow in Chinese politics at the Asia Society Policy Institute.

Other foreign leaders that have been invited to the inauguration include Argentinian President Javier Milei and Italian Prime Minister Giorgia Meloni.

Trump's spokesperson Karoline Leavitt told US media that the invitation to Xi was an "example of Trump creating an open dialogue with leaders of countries that are not just our allies but our adversaries and our competitors".

It also could be an attempt by Trump to show the world "he has the ability to influence Xi's decision-making and they have a special relationship", says Yun Sun, the director of the China program at the Stimson Center in Washington.

Earlier reports suggested that some Trump advisers wanted Cai Qi to attend.

Widely seen as Xi's right-hand man, 66-year-old Cai sits on the Communist Party's seven-man Politburo Standing Committee, China's equivalent of a cabinet.

The Financial Times quoted an unnamed insider saying that Trump would be "unhappy" if the Chinese envoy in attendance was "only at the level of Han or [Foreign Minister] Wang Yi".

The BBC has been unable to verify these claims.

But as vice-president, 70-year-old Han occupies a "very senior role in the Chinese state system" and the decision to send him "accords courtesy to Trump", says Chong Ja-Ian, a non-resident scholar at Carnegie China.

Han, who was appointed vice-president in March 2023, is known as "number eight" - the most senior leader after the seven men in the Politburo Standing Committee.

Han too had been a member until October 2022, when Xi began a historic third term in power and appointed his most trusted deputies to the top jobs.

Prior to that Han spent most of his political career in Shanghai, where he was born.

In 2007, he served as Xi's aide when the latter was the party secretary in Shanghai, before later assuming the post himself in 2012.

Foreign affairs has been a key focus for him in his stint as vice-president.

He led a group to promote the Belt and Road initiative - a key Chinese trade and infrastructure project - and headed a steering committee on the 2022 Winter Olympics in Beijing.

But the fact that Han no longer sits on the Politburo Standing Committee may have been a key consideration in Beijing's decision to send him.

"Should US-China relations take a turn for the worse from the party's perspective, Xi and the party will be able to show that they maintained some distance from Trump," Prof Chong said.

And it also helps that Han is not considered a part of Xi's inner circle, according to Mr Thomas.

"Xi trusts Han enough to undertake this mission but Han is not a key ally and could be safely blamed if it goes embarrassingly wrong." Additional reporting by Ian Tang of BBC Monitoring.

</CONTENT>
