<TITLE>Joe Biden confirms Israel and Hamas Gaza ceasefire deal</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2025-01-15</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.bbc.com/news/videos/cr536em4mlzo</URL>
<AUTHOR></AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
Joe Biden announced a ceasefire agreement between Israel and Hamas, aimed at ending the fighting in Gaza.
-  The deal is expected to facilitate the return of Israeli hostages held in the territory.
-  Biden also stated that the agreement will allow for much-needed humanitarian aid to reach Palestinians.
-  The BBC news report confirms the US President's declaration of a ceasefire.
-  This development comes after days of intense conflict and is significant in terms of potential de-escalation efforts.
-  The report links to live coverage and related news topics for further details.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- 1 day ago US &amp; Canada TikTok influencers on ban: 'We feel left out and powerless' Two creators, who've built their careers on the platform, talk about the potential fallout from a ban.
- 1 day ago US &amp; Canada 'Media wrongly saw weight gain as sign of sadness' Broadcaster Jameela Jamil talks about the tabloid media's obsession with the size of womens' bodies.
- 1 day ago London Inside Pompeii's hidden bathhouse The "once-in-a-century" find has been unearthed in the ancient Roman city.
- 1 day ago Europe Drone footage shows fire at one of world's largest battery plants The Moss Landing power plant, in California, was evacuated, as were people in the surrounding area.
- 1 day ago US &amp; Canada How a cigarette helped solve a 30-year-old murder Forensic scientist Joanne Cochrane used DNA testing on evidence that had been in storage for years.

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
Joe Biden has said a ceasefire deal between Israel and Hamas will "halt the fighting in Gaza" and boost "much-needed" humanitarian assistance to Palestinians.

In an address on Wednesday, the outgoing US president also said the agreement will mean Israeli hostages being held in the territory will "soon" return to their families.

Follow the latest on this story here .

3 days ago Israel-Gaza war Israel Hamas United States Joe Biden Explore More Thousands protest in Washington DC ahead of Trump inauguration 17 mins ago US &amp; Canada One-minute World News 4 hrs ago Video One-minute World News 4 hrs ago 'People were flying' after ski lift failed - eyewitness 4 hrs ago Europe Awkward inauguration moments 6 hrs ago What happens at an inauguration? 6 hrs ago Denis Law remembered as 'bundle of optimism' 8 hrs ago Scotland How Jamie Foxx got Cameron Diaz back in the spotlight 9 hrs ago Culture Watch: 'I'm the greatest patty man in the world' 14 hrs ago London Pirates travel for 14-year-old's funeral 14 hrs ago Tees How do you improve your bone health? 14 hrs ago Wales Road safety GCSE prepares students to be safe drivers 15 hrs ago Northern Ireland Otters returning to the centre of Bath 15 hrs ago Somerset East of England weather forecast 24 hrs ago England Watch: Firefighters rescue riders from Chilean Ferris wheel 24 hrs ago Latin America Mesmerising ice formations cover US lake 1 day ago US &amp; Canada A look back at Ronald Reagan's 1985 indoor inauguration 1 day ago Inmates fighting LA fires: 'Happy to pay my debt this way' 1 day ago US &amp; Canada TikTokers say goodbye to their 'Chinese spy' and move to RedNote 1 day ago World 'We dig holes but don't usually end up in them' 1 day ago Essex Moment Kamala Harris signs vice-president desk Outgoing Vice-President Kamala Harris has signed her office desk as part of a decades-long tradition.

1 day ago US &amp; Canada TikTok influencers on ban: 'We feel left out and powerless' Two creators, who've built their careers on the platform, talk about the potential fallout from a ban.

1 day ago US &amp; Canada 'Media wrongly saw weight gain as sign of sadness' Broadcaster Jameela Jamil talks about the tabloid media's obsession with the size of womens' bodies.

1 day ago London Inside Pompeii's hidden bathhouse The "once-in-a-century" find has been unearthed in the ancient Roman city.

1 day ago Europe Drone footage shows fire at one of world's largest battery plants The Moss Landing power plant, in California, was evacuated, as were people in the surrounding area.

1 day ago US &amp; Canada How a cigarette helped solve a 30-year-old murder Forensic scientist Joanne Cochrane used DNA testing on evidence that had been in storage for years.

1 day ago Glasgow &amp; West Scotland Watch: SpaceX loses Starship on test flight Watch: SpaceX loses Starship spacecraft but catches booster on seventh test flight 2 days ago Science &amp; Environment Homes and roads swamped by Brazil floodwaters A state of emergency has been declared in southern Brazil after heavy rain caused flooding in costal cities.

2 days ago Latin America Pupils take on 'job roles' to help future careers The roles vary from play leaders to IT technicians and a dance captain.

2 days ago Wiltshire Lifesaving assistance dog honoured by university Chief, a four-year-old German Shepherd, accompanies student Philippe everywhere.

2 days ago Gloucestershire 'Katie was too scared in prison to keep living' Scott Allan was 14 when his sister Katie was convicted.

She died a year later.

2 days ago Glasgow &amp; West Scotland Ivan's still loving his table tennis battles at 92 The pensioner plays every week at Great Wyrley Table Tennis Club, near Walsall.

2 days ago England 'I thought I was going to be a widow at 34' Victoria Thomas recalls sitting in a waiting room while her husband had 21 defibrillator shocks.

2 days ago Wales 'How could this be true?' - the house that survived an inferno A Los Angeles resident returned to find his home still standing after the Eaton fire torched his street.

2 days ago US &amp; Canada King Charles visits community food bank in Alloa The King visited The Gate which provides support to people facing homelessness and food insecurity.

2 days ago Tayside &amp; Central Scotland Watch: My husband went to work and didn't come home 'I don't want any other family to be in our position,' says Magda Szmeichel, who lost her husband in a recycling site fire.

2 days ago Tayside &amp; Central Scotland Watch: The brutal 268-mile race that only half of runners finish Competitors in the 268-mile Spine Race faced chest-high snow drifts and freezing conditions in their gruelling journey from Derbyshire to the Scottish Borders.

2 days ago South Scotland Reporter removed after interrupting Blinken's last speech The BBC was inside US Secretary Antony Blinken's last briefing when the interruption occurred.

2 days ago US &amp; Canada Bride 'shocked' after 1960s wedding video found Beryl Davies married Griff at Cilfowyr Chapel near Cardigan in October 1966.

2 days ago Wales Webcam captures Kilauea's lava fountains soaring 200ft (60m) high This is the fourth episode since eruption began December 2024.

2 days ago US &amp; Canada

</CONTENT>
