<TITLE>Yoon Suk Yeol's arrest fuels divisions in South Korea</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2025-01-15</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/c5yv4p95m6vo</URL>
<AUTHOR>Rachel Lee</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
South Korean President Yoon Suk Yeol was arrested on Wednesday, sparking a significant division within the country.
-  Supporters protested his arrest, while opponents celebrated.
-  The arrest followed weeks of political tension, including a failed attempt to arrest him in January and Yoon's controversial declaration of martial law in December.
-  Yoon's supporters feel his arrest is politically motivated, while his detractors believe he abused his power.
-  The country is deeply polarized, with the political unrest contributing to a subdued atmosphere, further exacerbated by a recent air disaster.
-  Yoon has largely avoided public appearances since his impeachment.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- Watch: BBC correspondent reports from between groups of protesters in Seoul

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
'My country is in crisis': A divided South Korea grapples with Yoon's arrest Reuters Yoon Suk Yeol's supporters scuffled with police officers trying to arrest the president Tears, dismayed cries and shocked faces: that was the reaction among the supporters of South Korea's suspended president Yoon Suk Yeol outside his home on hearing that he had been arrested.

It was a moment that had been in the making for weeks - ever since the last attempt to arrest Yoon on 3 January had failed after a dramatic standoff .

Yet, when the news of his arrest came on Wednesday morning, it only seemed to create more uncertainty – and highlight the divide in a country that has already been deeply polarised by Yoon's short-lived martial law order and impeachment by parliament.

"This country is in crisis," said one pro-Yoon woman, tears streaming down her face.

"I've been praying since last night for a stable and peaceful South Korea." It's what both sides say they want but they cannot agree on how to get there.

For the past month, a defiant 64-year-old Yoon was holed up inside his presidential compound in central Seoul, as his supporters and detractors rallied outside.

They had turned Yongsan in central Seoul into an epicentre of protest, with tensions often running high.

Hundreds of them had camped out overnight on Tuesday, as the arrest appeared imminent, in temperatures that plummeted to -8C.

The only thing they shared was the food trucks keeping them warm with steaming drinks and instant noodles.

Reuters Yoon Suk Yeol delivers the speech to declare martial law on 3 December, 2024 Yoon's supporters jostled with the police officers - numbering 3,000 – who assembled to take him into custody.

"Don't call us stupid far-rights," one protester shouted, reflecting the frustration in the Yoon camp.

A starkly different scene unfolded on the other side of the street.

Opponents of Yoon, who had long called for his arrest, celebrated with chants and cheers.

Their jubilation only made the pro-Yoon camp angrier, with some yelling: "Don't taunt us - this is not funny." The gulf is not restricted to this corner of Yongsan.

It has loomed over the whole country for more than a month.

Yoon's shock announcement of martial law on 3 December almost instantly divided public opinion into two camps.

While some believed his claims the country was under threat, a larger group viewed the move as an opportunistic abuse of power.

This sentiment was reflected even within Yoon's own party, as several of its lawmakers voted to impeach him.

The growing opposition to Yoon's actions has cast a pall over the nation.

The year-end season in South Korea is usually vibrant.

But this year has been noticeably different.

The political turmoil – along with the devastating Jeju Air crash on 29 December – has created a subdued and sombre atmosphere.

Yoon himself had largely avoided the public since he was impeached by parliament in mid-December.

He never stepped out of his residence to meet his supporters.

On New Year's Day, he sent them a note, saying he was "closely watching [them] via a YouTube livestream".

He skipped the first hearing of his impeachment trial on 14 January, delaying the proceedings.

Before that he had refused to comply with multiple summonses as part of the criminal investigation on insurrection charges, which led to the arrest warrant.

Reuters Protesters have been calling for the impeachment of Yoon On Wednesday, he released a video statement saying he would co-operate with the Corruption Investigation Office (CIO) to avoid "bloodshed", while claiming their arrest warrant was not legally valid.

It was a massive operation, which followed a warning from the CIO that the presidential security team could also be arrested if they tried to block Yoon's arrest again.

Unlike last time, the CIO and police were successful in detaining Yoon, although it still took hours to negotiate.

Once he left the presidential compound, the streets surrounding it began to empty.

Protesters dispersed and the police barricades were removed.

Some of Yoon's supporters moved to the CIO office where he is being questioned.

They need another warrant to detain him for more than 48 hours.

While Yoon's arrest has concluded the security standoff, it has not ended the rift that exists well beyond it in South Korea, which in recent decades has emerged as a leading global economy and beacon of democracy in Asia.

"Arresting the country's leader does not even make sense," declared one protester outside the presidential compound.

An opposing voice countered: "Executing the arrest warrant is a necessary step - Yoon attempted to undermine the country's democracy." Reuters Police officers and investigators leave the presidential residence with Yoon on Wednesday morning Yoon himself continues to question whether the CIO has the right to arrest him – his lawyers say no, because insurrection is not a charge of corruption.

But the CIO says that the insurrection is a form of abuse of power – a charge that is within their remit to investigate.

What may appear to be a legal debate has veered deep into political territory, with both sides seeking to control the narrative.

The swift impeachment of Yoon's immediate successor - Prime Minister Han Duck-soo – has already led to allegations that impeachment is being used as a political tool against Yoon's allies.

And Yoon's impeachment trial getting under way this week has created more uncertainty.

Public attention will be on what statements, if any, Yoon makes while he is detained or under trial.

The fear is that the whatever comes next for Yoon, the polarisation that has come to define South Korean politics is here to stay.

Watch: BBC correspondent reports from between groups of protesters in Seoul

</CONTENT>
