<TITLE>Israeli air strikes continue in Gaza after ceasefire deal announced</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2025-01-16</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/crke088e27lo</URL>
<AUTHOR>Ruth Comerford</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
Israeli air strikes continued in Gaza overnight, despite a ceasefire agreement announced for Sunday, killing at least 73 people.
-  The agreement, which involves the release of 33 hostages, is contingent on Hamas accepting all terms.
-  The Israeli Defense Forces reportedly targeted 50 locations and killed a Hamas operative.
-  While Hamas confirmed its acceptance of the deal, Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu faces potential cabinet opposition from hardline ministers, who may trigger early elections.
-  The ceasefire's success hinges on Hamas' full compliance and maintaining calm on both sides during the initial phase.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- Getty Images Low level fires broke out following overnight strikes in Deir al-Balah, south Gaza Israel launched a campaign to destroy Hamas - which is proscribed as a terrorist organisation by Israel, the US and others - in response to an unprecedented cross-border attack on 7 October 2023, in which about 1,200 people were killed and 251 others were taken hostage.
- More than 46,788 people have been killed in Gaza since then, according to the territory's Hamas-run health ministry.
- Most of the 2.3 million population has also been displaced, there is widespread destruction and there are severe shortages of food, fuel, medicine and shelter, while aid agencies struggle to get help to those in need.
- Israel says 94 of the hostages are still being held by Hamas, 34 of whom are presumed dead.
- In addition, there are four Israelis who were abducted before the war, two of whom are dead.

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
Dozens killed as Israeli strikes continue ahead of Gaza ceasefire AFP Journalist Ahmad Al-Shayah was reportedly killed overnight in Khan Younis Israeli air strikes are continuing in Gaza ahead of the ceasefire agreement and hostage deal with Hamas, which comes into effect on Sunday, subject to the Israeli cabinet's approval.

The strikes killed 73 people overnight, following the announcement of the deal, Gaza's Hamas-run civil defence agency reported.

Victims include 12 people who were living in a residential block in the Sheikh Radwan neighbourhood of Gaza City, the health ministry said.

The Israeli Defence Forces (IDF) initially said "a fallen projectile" had been identified in southern Israel on Thursday, but later said it had been wrongly identified.

Israel has previously launched air strikes in the run-up to ceasefire arrangements taking effect, most recently in Lebanon, where heavy bombing hit the capital, Beirut, just hours before the ceasefire there in November.

A doctor in Gaza City's Baptist Hospital said staff "did not rest for one minute" during the "bloody night".

"The injured kept on coming," Dr Amjad Eliwah told the BBC.

"The dead were sent directly to the morgue." He said "for a little while, everyone was happy and joyful", following news of the ceasefire.

"Then the same people who were happy were dead." Getty Images Children are among those reportedly injured in the overnight strikes Follow live updates on this story Dozens killed as Israeli strikes continue ahead of ceasefire What we know about the agreement Analysis: Long-overdue deal may end killings but not the conflict History of the Israel-Gaza war explained Strikes were carried out on 50 targets over the past day, the IDF and the Israeli Security Agency said in a statement.

Israel's forces overnight killed a man described as having been involved in Hamas's 7 October attack , the statement also said.

Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu was expected to ratify the Gaza ceasefire agreement in parliament on Thursday, but his office alleges Hamas has "reneged" on parts of the agreement, prompting a "last-minute crisis".

It adds the cabinet will not convene until Hamas has accepted "all elements of the agreement".

A senior Hamas official told the BBC that his movement was committed to the agreement announced by the mediators and that the head of its delegation, Khalil al-Hayya, had officially informed Qatar and Egypt of its approval of all the terms of the agreement.

Two hardline right-wing ministers, Finance Minister Bezalel Smotrich and National Security Minister Itamar Ben Gvir, have long threatened to quit the government coalition if the ceasefire goes ahead.

That could prompt fresh elections in Israel, but their resignations will not block the deal if Netanyahu wants it to happen, observers say.

The prime minister of Qatar - which mediated negotiations - has called for "calm" on both sides before the start of the first six-week phase of the ceasefire deal.

This will see 33 hostages - including women, children and elderly people - exchanged for Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails.

Israeli forces will also withdraw to the east, away from densely populated areas of Gaza.

Displaced Palestinians will be allowed to begin returning to their homes and hundreds of aid lorries will finally be allowed into the territory each day.

Reuters Women and children were injured in the Israeli strikes on Wednesday night Negotiations for the second phase - which should see the remaining hostages released, a full Israeli troop withdrawal and a return to "sustainable calm" - will start on the 16th day.

The third and final stage will involve the return of any remaining hostages' bodies and the reconstruction of Gaza - something which could take years.

Achim Steiner from the United Nations Development Programme told the BBC's Newsday programme that the reconstruction of Gaza would be a huge challenge, given the massive destruction inflicted by the war.

He said 40 million tons of "toxic" rubble needed to be removed before Gazans could return to where their houses used to be.

"This is a very complex undertaking that we are now confronted with," he said.

Getty Images Low level fires broke out following overnight strikes in Deir al-Balah, south Gaza Israel launched a campaign to destroy Hamas - which is proscribed as a terrorist organisation by Israel, the US and others - in response to an unprecedented cross-border attack on 7 October 2023, in which about 1,200 people were killed and 251 others were taken hostage.

More than 46,788 people have been killed in Gaza since then, according to the territory's Hamas-run health ministry.

Most of the 2.3 million population has also been displaced, there is widespread destruction and there are severe shortages of food, fuel, medicine and shelter, while aid agencies struggle to get help to those in need.

Israel says 94 of the hostages are still being held by Hamas, 34 of whom are presumed dead.

In addition, there are four Israelis who were abducted before the war, two of whom are dead.

Around 58.9% of buildings in Gaza have probably been damaged since the start of the war

</CONTENT>
