<TITLE>Israel vote on Gaza ceasefire deal delayed</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2025-01-16</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/c93ll522e9no</URL>
<AUTHOR>Maia Davies</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
Israel's cabinet vote to approve a Gaza ceasefire deal has been delayed.
-  Prime Minister Netanyahu accuses Hamas of seeking last-minute changes, specifically trying to add members to the list of Palestinian prisoners to be released.
-  The delay comes after Israeli strikes in Gaza following the ceasefire announcement, killing more than 80 people.
-  Despite the delay, US Secretary of State Blinken remains confident the ceasefire will begin as planned on Sunday.
-  The approval hinges on Hamas' acceptance of all terms of the agreement.
-  The cabinet meeting is expected to occur on Friday, although a potential resignation from a right-wing party remains a possibility.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- Getty Images The ceasefire is due to begin on Sunday, should it be approved Israeli air strikes continued after the deal was announced on Wednesday.
- At least 12 people were killed in Gaza City, where a doctor told the BBC staff "did not rest for one minute" during the "bloody night".
- Strikes were carried out on 50 targets in Gaza since the deal's announcement, the Israel Defense Forces and the Israeli Security Agency said in a statement.
- The prime minister of Qatar - which mediated negotiations - called for "calm" on both sides before the start of the first six-week phase of the ceasefire deal.
- Israel launched a campaign to destroy Hamas - which is proscribed as a terrorist organisation by Israel, the US and others - in response to an unprecedented cross-border attack on Israel on 7 October 2023, in which about 1,200 people were killed and 251 others were taken hostage.

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
Israel delays vote to approve Gaza ceasefire deal Getty Images Strikes continued in Gaza overnight on Wednesday after the ceasefire deal was announced Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has delayed a cabinet vote to approve the Gaza ceasefire deal, due on Thursday, accusing Hamas of seeking last-minute changes to the agreement.

US Secretary of State Antony Blinken said a "loose end" was being tied up and that he was confident the ceasefire would still begin on Sunday as planned.

Although Israeli negotiators agreed to the deal after months of talks, it cannot be implemented until it is approved by the security cabinet and government.

Hamas said it was committed to the deal, but the BBC understands it was trying to add some of its members to the list of Palestinian prisoners that would be released under the deal.

The delay came after Israeli strikes in Gaza following Wednesday's announcement of a deal killed more than 80 people, according to the Hamas-run health ministry.

A few hours before the Thursday morning meeting was due, Netanyahu accused Hamas of trying to "extort last minute concessions".

The cabinet would not convene until Hamas accepted "all elements of the agreement," a statement from his office read.

Blinken said such a delay was to be expected in such a "challenging" situation.

"It's not exactly surprising that in a process and negotiation that has been this challenging and this fraught, you may get a loose end," he told a press conference in Washington.

"We're tying up that loose end as we speak." He said the US was "confident" the deal would come into force on Sunday as planned, and that the ceasefire would then persist.

Follow live updates on this story Dozens killed as Israeli strikes continue ahead of ceasefire What we know about the agreement Analysis: Long-overdue deal may end killings but not the conflict History of the Israel-Gaza war explained Israeli media reported that the cabinet was expected to meet on Friday to approve the deal and that the alleged issue had been resolved, although this was not officially confirmed.

A majority of Israeli ministers are expected to back the deal, but late on Thursday Security Minister Itamar Ben-Gvir said his right-wing party would quit Netanyahu's government if it was approved.

"The deal that is taking shape is a reckless deal," Ben-Gvir told a news conference, adding it would "erase the achievements of the war".

However, he said his Otzma Yehudit (Jewish Power) party would not seek to topple the government should the deal be ratified.

He urged the leader of the other far-right party in government, Finance Minister Bezalel Smotrich of the Religious Zionist party, to join him in resigning.

Ohad Tal, the party's chair in Israel's parliament, told BBC Radio 4 that it was "debating" whether to leave Netanyahu's government over the deal.

EPA Ben Gvir said the deal would "erase the achievements of the war" Meanwhile, a senior Hamas official told the BBC that the group was committed to the agreement announced by the mediators.

The head of Hamas's delegation, Khalil al-Hayya, officially informed Qatar and Egypt of its approval of all the terms of the agreement, the official told the BBC.

But BBC Gaza correspondent Rushdi Abualouf understands that Hamas was attempting to add the names of one or two symbolic members to the list of prisoners that would be released under the deal.

The first six-week phase of the deal would see 33 hostages - including women, children and elderly people - exchanged for Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails.

Israeli troops would also withdraw to the east, away from densely populated areas of Gaza.

Displaced Palestinians would be able to start returning to their homes and hundreds of aid lorries would be allowed entry to the territory each day.

Negotiations for the second phase - which should see the remaining hostages released, a full Israeli troop withdrawal and a return to "sustainable calm" - would start on the 16th day.

The third and final stage would involve the return of any remaining hostages' bodies and the reconstruction of Gaza - something which could take years.

Getty Images The ceasefire is due to begin on Sunday, should it be approved Israeli air strikes continued after the deal was announced on Wednesday.

At least 12 people were killed in Gaza City, where a doctor told the BBC staff "did not rest for one minute" during the "bloody night".

Strikes were carried out on 50 targets in Gaza since the deal's announcement, the Israel Defense Forces and the Israeli Security Agency said in a statement.

The prime minister of Qatar - which mediated negotiations - called for "calm" on both sides before the start of the first six-week phase of the ceasefire deal.

Israel launched a campaign to destroy Hamas - which is proscribed as a terrorist organisation by Israel, the US and others - in response to an unprecedented cross-border attack on Israel on 7 October 2023, in which about 1,200 people were killed and 251 others were taken hostage.

More than 46,788 people have been killed in Gaza since then, according to the territory's Hamas-run health ministry.

Most of Gaza's 2.3 million population has also been displaced, there is widespread destruction and there are severe shortages of food, fuel, medicine and shelter, while aid agencies struggle to get help to those in need.

Israel says 94 of the hostages are still being held by Hamas, 34 of whom are presumed dead.

There are four Israelis who were abducted before the war, two of whom are dead.

</CONTENT>
