<TITLE>Washington Post cartoonist quits after satire of Jeff Bezos is rejected</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2025-01-04</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/cn4xk4y2emro</URL>
<AUTHOR>Ana Faguy</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
Washington Post cartoonist Ann Telnaes resigned after the paper refused to publish a satirical cartoon of Jeff Bezos and other billionaires.
-  The cartoon depicted the billionaires kneeling before a statue of Donald Trump, offering cash.
-  Telnaes argued the rejection was a threat to a free press, while the Post's editor cited planned similar content as the reason for the rejection.
-  The resignation comes after a history of cartoons being rejected, including one in 2015 depicting Ted Cruz's daughters as monkeys.
-  The Post's editorial page editor defended the decision, stating it was due to planned content on the same subject, not Bezos's status as the paper's owner.
-  This incident highlights the potential conflicts and editorial pressures within a newspaper that has a wealthy owner.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- A Pulitzer Prize-winning cartoonist has resigned from the Washington Post after the newspaper refused to publish a cartoon satirical of its billionaire owner Jeff Bezos.
- Ann Telnaes, a long-time Washington Post cartoonist, created a cartoon of Mr Bezos and other tycoons kneeling before a statue of President-elect Donald Trump.
- She said the paper's refusal to run the cartoon was a "game changer" and described it as "dangerous for a free press".
- But David Shipley, the editorial page editor at the paper, said he decided not to run the cartoon in order to avoid repetition, not because it mocked the paper's owner.
- In the cartoon, Mr Bezos, Meta founder Mark Zuckerberg and OpenAI's Sam Altman are depicted on their knees giving bags of cash to a statue of Trump.

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
A Pulitzer Prize-winning cartoonist has resigned from the Washington Post after the newspaper refused to publish a cartoon satirical of its billionaire owner Jeff Bezos.

Ann Telnaes, a long-time Washington Post cartoonist, created a cartoon of Mr Bezos and other tycoons kneeling before a statue of President-elect Donald Trump.

She said the paper's refusal to run the cartoon was a "game changer" and described it as "dangerous for a free press".

But David Shipley, the editorial page editor at the paper, said he decided not to run the cartoon in order to avoid repetition, not because it mocked the paper's owner.

In the cartoon, Mr Bezos, Meta founder Mark Zuckerberg and OpenAI's Sam Altman are depicted on their knees giving bags of cash to a statue of Trump.

Mickey Mouse is also depicted prostrate in the cartoon.

ABC News – which is owned by Disney – last month agreed to pay $15m to settle a defamation lawsuit filed by Trump.

Ms Telnaes announced her resignation in a Substack post on Friday, saying she had worked for the newspaper since 2008.

"In all that time I've never had a cartoon killed because of who or what I chose to aim my pen at," she wrote.

"Until now.

"The cartoon that was killed criticizes the billionaire tech and media chief executives who have been doing their best to curry favor with incoming President-elect Trump." She said the cartoon was satirising "these men with lucrative government contracts and an interest in eliminating regulations".

But Mr Shipley told the BBC his decision not to publish the cartoon was because of repetition of another piece set to publish.

"I respect Ann Telnaes and all she has given to The Post.

But I must disagree with her interpretation of events," he said in a statement.

"Not every editorial judgment is a reflection of a malign force." He added: "My decision was guided by the fact that we had just published a column on the same topic as the cartoon and had already scheduled another column – this one a satire – for publication." This is not the first time one of Ms Telnaes' cartoons has been spiked by the Washington Post.

In 2015, the newspaper retracted one of her sketches that depicted the young daughters of Texas Senator Ted Cruz as monkeys.

Explaining its decision at the time, the newspaper said its editorial policy was to leave children "out of it".

Last month, Mr Bezos announced Amazon would donate $1m to Trump's inauguration fund and make a $1m in-kind contribution.

Mr Bezos also described Trump's re-election victory as "an extraordinary political comeback" and dined with him at the president-elect's Mar-a-Lago residence in Florida.

The newspaper faced a liberal backlash weeks before the November presidential election after Mr Bezos interceded to prevent the editorial board endorsing Vice-President Kamala Harris.

Mr Bezos defended the move, but the newspaper reported it lost more than 250,000 subscribers following the decision.

The Los Angeles Times, whose owner Patrick Soon-Shiong is also depicted in the now-killed cartoon, made a similar move and said the newspaper would not publish its endorsement of Harris in October.

</CONTENT>
