<TITLE>From Sudan to the Sahel, War Spread in Africa in 2024</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2024-12-27</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://foreignpolicy.com/2024/12/27/2024-africa-crises-war-sudan-congo-ethiopia-sahel/</URL>
<AUTHOR>Sasha Polakow-Suransky</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
In 2024, African conflicts worsened significantly.
-  Sudan's civil war between the Sudanese Armed Forces and Rapid Support Forces continued, causing a major refugee crisis.
-  Tensions escalated between Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of Congo, with Congolese troops clashing with M23 rebels, who are believed to be Rwandan proxies.
-  Militants in the Sahel region expanded their reach southward, threatening coastal states.
-  These conflicts are fueled by local grievances and historical ethnic tensions, and exacerbated by disinformation campaigns on social media.
-  The article highlights the spread of jihadist violence beyond Mali into neighboring countries like Burkina Faso and, potentially, Ghana.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
-  Hatred-filled Facebook posts have been linked to violence in Ethiopia’s civil war, and advances in artificial intelligence could make social media much more dangerous in conflicts across the continent—especially because of the dearth of content moderation in African languages in which hate speech and disinformation are spread.
-   Meanwhile, in West Africa, the conflicts that have bedeviled Mali for more than a decade are now bleeding beyond its borders at a time when military-led governments are expelling French and U.S.
- troops from their territory.
-   Burkina Faso, Mali’s southern neighbor, has faced jihadist violence for several years.
- But in the past year, fighters have started to show up in countries that long seemed immune to this trend, including Ghana.
- Much of the violence is driven by local clashes and grievances, but historical rivalries between ethnic groups have begun to take on a nastier, more xenophobic tone as governments scapegoat entire groups for the crimes of some of their members while relying on military force to bring peace—a method that often drives more recruits into the arms of extremists.
- 

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
Throughout 2024, many of Africa’s crises worsened: Sudan’s civil war escalated, tensions between Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo grew, and militants in the Sahel continued to spread south toward coastal states.


 In Sudan, fighting between the Sudanese Armed Forces and the rebel Rapid Support Forces has not abated.

Sudanese writers have contributed hard-hitting arguments to FP since the war began in April 2023, and this year, the conflict continued to take a horrendous toll on civilians, exacerbating the mass refugee crisis.


 Throughout 2024, many of Africa’s crises worsened: Sudan’s civil war escalated, tensions between Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo grew, and militants in the Sahel continued to spread south toward coastal states.


 In Sudan, fighting between the Sudanese Armed Forces and the rebel Rapid Support Forces has not abated.

Sudanese writers have contributed hard-hitting arguments to FP since the war began in April 2023, and this year, the conflict continued to take a horrendous toll on civilians, exacerbating the mass refugee crisis.


 In eastern Congo, near the border with Rwanda, clashes between Congolese troops and M23 rebels—widely considered to be a Rwandan proxy—have escalated, leading some to call on the United States to intervene before it’s too late.

This is a war that is not only being fought on the battlefield; increasingly, disinformation on social media is fomenting violence in Congo and further afield.


 Hatred-filled Facebook posts have been linked to violence in Ethiopia’s civil war, and advances in artificial intelligence could make social media much more dangerous in conflicts across the continent—especially because of the dearth of content moderation in African languages in which hate speech and disinformation are spread.


 Meanwhile, in West Africa, the conflicts that have bedeviled Mali for more than a decade are now bleeding beyond its borders at a time when military-led governments are expelling French and U.S.

troops from their territory.


 Burkina Faso, Mali’s southern neighbor, has faced jihadist violence for several years.

But in the past year, fighters have started to show up in countries that long seemed immune to this trend, including Ghana.

Much of the violence is driven by local clashes and grievances, but historical rivalries between ethnic groups have begun to take on a nastier, more xenophobic tone as governments scapegoat entire groups for the crimes of some of their members while relying on military force to bring peace—a method that often drives more recruits into the arms of extremists.


 Sadly, these conflicts are unlikely to end anytime soon, and it’s therefore worth revisiting our coverage from 2024.

Below are five of Foreign Policy ’s top reads on these issues from the past year.


 
 1.

Could Ghana Be Jihadists’ Next Target? 
 by Eliasu Tanko and James Courtright, May 14 
 Eliasu Tanko and James Courtright warn that Ghana could be next in jihadists’ sights and that Accra was not taking the threat seriously enough.

“While officials insist that the government is mounting a robust response, there is significant evidence that it has failed to stop insurgents from entering Ghanaian territory,” they note, arguing that “if the militants’ calculus were to change, they would find many of the same vulnerabilities in Ghana that they have exploited in other countries.” 
 
 2.

How Africa’s War on Disinformation Can Save Democracies Everywhere 
 by Abdullahi Alim, June 21 
 Abdullahi Alim examines the nexus between the virtual and real-world battlefields as social media fuels outrage and violence across the continent.

From Ethiopia to Congo, he demonstrates how disinformation and propaganda disseminated online leads to actual death and destruction.


 “The advent of adversarial artificial intelligence—which involves algorithms that seek to dodge content moderation tools—could light the match of the continent’s next war, and most social media companies are woefully underprepared,” Alim argues.

“With limited oversight, this can easily tip some communities—ones that are already fraught with tensions—toward conflict and collapse.” 
 
 3.

How Foreign Intervention Failed Mali 
 by John A.

Lechner, Sergey Eledinov, and Adam Sandor, Sept.

10 
 
 A soldier in combat gear and a helmet, holding a rifle, is seen in the foreground.

Beyond him, two women and two children are seen framed by a doorway set into a stone wall, peering out at the soldier.


 A French soldier patrols the streets of Gao, Mali, on Dec.

4, 2021.

Thomas Coex/AFP via Getty Images 
 In Mali, John Lechner, Sergey Eledinov, and Adam Sandor chronicle how various foreign actors—from France to Russia to Ukraine—have made the conflict worse and diverted attention from the local grievances that provoke violence, shifting the focus to geopolitical competition.

“The roots of conflict in Mali—the unequal distribution of political power and resources between the center and periphery—cannot be solved through violence,” they argue.


 
 4.

To End Sudan’s War, Pressure the UAE 
 by Yasir Zaidan, Aug.

29 
 Yasir Zaidan points the finger squarely at the United Arab Emirates for prolonging Sudan’s war, accusing the wealthy Gulf state of bankrolling and arming rebel forces and urging the international community to hold it accountable.

“There is no substantial pressure being applied on the UAE,” he writes.

“The lack of accountability for those perpetrating violence and weaponizing famine is exacerbating Sudan’s crisis.” 
 
 5.

Europe Helps Fuel Conflict in Sudan While Shutting Its Victims Out 
 by Suha Musa, Nov.

4 
 Suha Musa takes the European Union to task for its double standards on asylum.

“Instead of directing funds to protecting and supplying refugee camps, European funds have instead gone to policing the Mediterranean —with the hope of curbing any immigration,” she writes.

“The indifference and hostility toward non-white, non-Christian refugees who are also fleeing a devastating conflict suggest a disturbing double standard.”

</CONTENT>
