<TITLE>The Hezbollah Pager Explosions Are More Dangerous Than You Think</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2024-09-24</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://foreignpolicy.com/2024/09/24/hezbollah-pager-explosions-lebanon-israel-middle-east-iran-us-policy/</URL>
<AUTHOR>Howard W. French</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
Israel's recent attacks on Hezbollah in Lebanon and Syria involved sophisticated, synchronized explosions of booby-trapped pagers and walkie-talkies.
-  While impressive operationally, these attacks killed at least 40 civilians and injured thousands more, raising serious ethical concerns.
-  The explosions targeted Hezbollah members not actively engaged in combat, potentially violating international humanitarian law.
-  Experts like Michael Walzer and Leon Panetta have criticized the attacks as likely war crimes and acts of terrorism.
-  The article highlights the significant civilian casualties caused by the attacks, contrasting the impressive technical execution with the human cost.
-  The author argues that the attacks should prompt critical reflection on Israeli policy in the Middle East.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
-  My concerns with Israel’s recent tactics in Lebanon, including an escalating air war against Hezbollah positions in the south used to fire rockets into Israel, go further.
- No sooner had the air cleared from the detonating pagers than analysts began asking whether Israel had achieved any strategic gains from the attacks.
- This remains unclear.
- The same has been true during nearly a year of Israel’s offensive in Gaza against Hamas.
- There, a basic question remains unanswered: What does Israel do once its military operations end? 

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
Beyond human rights concerns, the attacks raise questions about U.S.

and Israeli policy in the Middle East.


 
 
 
 A man shields his face while grimacing and holding up a yellow flag.


 
A man holds a Hezbollah flag during the funeral of people killed after hundreds of pagers exploded in a deadly wave across Lebanon the previous day, in a southern Beirut district on Sept.

18.

Anwar Amro / AFP via Getty Images 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
September 24, 2024, 2:34 PM 
 
 View Comments 
 
 
 
 When Israel attacked Hezbollah last week by unleashing a spate of synchronized explosions in Lebanon and Syria, the first response of many observers—wherever they sat on the geopolitical spectrum—was of awe.


 Adversaries and friendly nations alike marveled at the degree of sophistication needed to pull this off.

Not only did agents working for Israel have to place tiny amounts of explosives inside of pagers and walkie-talkies; they also had to get these into the hands of a sworn enemy.

The feat was a reminder of Israel’s long history of technical and operational sophistication that includes its victory against a coalition of Arab armies in the 1967 Six-Day War, the raid on Uganda’s Entebbe Airport to free hostages captured in the hijacking of a commercial airliner in 1976, and the use of booby-trapped cellphones to attack militant groups that dates back to the late 1990s.


 
 When Israel attacked Hezbollah last week by unleashing a spate of synchronized explosions in Lebanon and Syria, the first response of many observers—wherever they sat on the geopolitical spectrum—was of awe.


 Adversaries and friendly nations alike marveled at the degree of sophistication needed to pull this off.

Not only did agents working for Israel have to place tiny amounts of explosives inside of pagers and walkie-talkies; they also had to get these into the hands of a sworn enemy.

The feat was a reminder of Israel’s long history of technical and operational sophistication that includes its victory against a coalition of Arab armies in the 1967 Six-Day War, the raid on Uganda’s Entebbe Airport to free hostages captured in the hijacking of a commercial airliner in 1976, and the use of booby-trapped cellphones to attack militant groups that dates back to the late 1990s.


 As impressive as the latest attacks were on a technical level, they should raise numerous objections.

For one, they devastated civilians.

The pagers belonged to Hezbollah members, but the explosions—which killed at least 40 people and injured more than 3,000 others—put many noncombatants at risk.

Think of what would have happened to passengers in a car or children at the dining table if the driver or a relative was carrying one of the devices.

Video footage has shown that some exploded in markets and street corners.


 Political theorist Michael Walzer wrote in an opinion piece in the New York Times that the explosions, which targeted Hezbollah operatives who were not actively engaged in warfare at the moment of the strike, were “very likely war crimes.” Even Leon Panetta, a former U.S.

defense secretary and CIA director, said he doesn’t “think there’s any question” that the attacks were a form of terrorism.


 My concerns with Israel’s recent tactics in Lebanon, including an escalating air war against Hezbollah positions in the south used to fire rockets into Israel, go further.

No sooner had the air cleared from the detonating pagers than analysts began asking whether Israel had achieved any strategic gains from the attacks.

This remains unclear.

The same has been true during nearly a year of Israel’s offensive in Gaza against Hamas.

There, a basic question remains unanswered: What does Israel do once its military operations end? 
 What links these two campaigns is Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s apparent view that Israel can achieve long-standing security through a policy of military superiority coupled with uninhibited offensive operations.

The United States tacitly supports this position through its feeble criticism and almost unlimited supply of arms to Israel.

As Gaza has begun to show—and as another war with Lebanon, if it comes, will likely reaffirm—this approach amounts to scorching the earth in neighboring lands in the deluded hope that Israel can kill enough of the “bad guys,” irrespective of collateral damage, to achieve peace.


 The first obvious flaw to this approach is that each military operation risks generating new enemies, perpetuating enmity between Israel and its neighbors.

Total Israeli military control in Gaza, for example, does nothing to address the pressing need for political and territorial rights for Palestinians.

Indeed, the territory’s hopelessness and domination ensure new forms of resistance against Israel in the future.

By the same token, an Israeli advance into southern Lebanon would merely create a new frontier for hostility between the two countries, just as surely as the campaign’s death and destruction would drive more Lebanese people in the direction of violent reprisals against Israel.


 My biggest concerns, however, go beyond even this and implicate the strategy of the United States as much as Israel.

In recent decades, the two allies have regarded Iran as the ultimate source of violence and instability in the Middle East.

But with the exception of international efforts to persuade Iran to forgo nuclear weapons development, the United States—never mind Israel—has shown almost no creativity in engaging Iran politically.

(Unrealistic preconditions to engagement, such as requiring Tehran to first change its political system or recognize Israel’s right to exist, do not count.) 
 What makes the problems of the Middle East especially hard to manage is that both Israel and Iran are incarnations of old civilizational and religious identities.

Many in the West know that Israel is the land of the Bible and that many Jewish people legitimate their support for Zionism partly on the basis of the existence of an ancient Israel, whose stories constitute the essence of the Old Testament.

Less widely understood outside the realm of specialists is that Iran is also the inheritor of traditions of language, culture, identity, empire, and statehood that date far into antiquity.


 In response to seemingly unending violence in Gaza, many people have raised their voices in exasperation to state that there is no substitute for recognizing that neither Jews nor Palestinians will ever disappear from the lands where conflict currently divides them.

This means that lasting peace will require people—and eventually states—on both sides of this deep divide to recognize each other’s needs and interests.


 This is equally true for Iran.

A policy of demonizing a country of 90 million people is not going to make it go away.

In fact, Western attempts at isolation only increase Iran’s determination to build up nonstate proxies such as Hezbollah and the Houthis in Yemen, as well as deepen ties with Russia and China.


 A central preoccupation in the West, as in Israel, is Iran’s nuclear program and the prospect that Tehran could soon break out from its protracted research and refinement phase and develop usable nuclear weapons.

Unfortunately, the global record of disarming nuclear-capable states is extremely unpromising.

Ukraine is one of the only examples of a nation decommissioning its nuclear weapons, inherited from the Soviet era, and this has sadly helped make it vulnerable to Vladimir Putin’s Russia.

Years of Western and Asian diplomacy around North Korea, for example, proved unable to convince Pyongyang to abandon its nuclear program.

Like it or not—and I don’t—that is because the North Korean regime feels fundamentally insecure about its future.

Moreover, it is widely understood that Israel has for decades possessed a nuclear arsenal, though the country has not officially acknowledged this.


 Concerns over Iran’s nuclear program should not be an obstacle to speaking with Tehran more and exploring ways of defusing enmities in the region.

We are likely to find that the only way to ensure broad security in the Middle East, including for Israel, is by somehow bringing Iran into deeper contact with the West and eventually addressing its security concerns—along with those of Israel, other states such as Saudi Arabia, and the Palestinians.

The sooner the West can begin doing so, the better.


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Howard W.

French is a columnist at Foreign Policy, a professor at the Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, and a longtime foreign correspondent.

His latest book is Born in Blackness: Africa, Africans and the Making of the Modern World, 1471 to the Second World War.

X: @hofrench 
 
 
 Read More 
 
 
 
 
 People watch a televised speech by Hezbollah leader Hassan Nasrallah from a cafe at the entrance of the Sabra camp for Palestinian refugees in Beirut.


 
 
 
 The Beeper Balance Sheet 
 
 The stunning attacks are a setback for Hezbollah but raise risks for Israel.


 
 
 
 
 
 
 People gather at the entrance of the American University of Beirut Medical Center.


 
 
 
 The Biggest Question About the Hezbollah Pager Attack Is Why Now 
 
 A technically adroit strike could be a curtain-raiser for an expanded conflict.


 
 
 
 
 
 More from Foreign Policy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 An illustration shows three tiers of classes, working class on the lowest with a bike messenger, a construction worker, a hotel worker, and a waiter; the second tier shows the professional-managerial class with a doctor, a graduate, and a man with a briefcase; the top layer shows two men golfing.

Between them is a Donald Trump in a champagne coupe.


 
 
 
 America Is Locked in a New Class War 
 
 Money and education no longer explain voting patterns.


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 An illustration shows Joe Biden at a lecturn on a bridge spanning a chasm with two heads of Donald Trump in profile forming the base of the bridge.


 
 
 
 Why Biden’s Foreign Policy Fell Short 
 
 The White House never met its own grandiose standards.


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 An illustration shows Donald Trump smiling zanily with yellow hair flying one direction and a red tie snaking through his ears and around his head wildly.


 
 
 
 Does the Madman Theory Actually Work? 
 
 Trump likes to think his unpredictability is an asset.


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 An illustrations shows the silhouette of Donald Trump with a face filled with pricetags.


 
 
 
 Trump Is Ushering In a More Transactional World 
 
 Countries and companies with clout might thrive.

The rest, not so much.


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 OTHER SUBSCRIPTION OPTIONS

</CONTENT>
