<TITLE>The PRC at 75: How China Has Transformed Over Its Modern History</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2024-10-13</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://foreignpolicy.com/2024/10/13/china-prc-founding-75-anniversary-history-mao-xi-jinping/</URL>
<AUTHOR>Chloe Hadavas</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
This Foreign Policy article examines the 75th anniversary of the People's Republic of China (PRC), highlighting the CCP's efforts to rewrite its history.
-  The article argues that the CCP views history as a tool, not a record.
-  It explores key historical events, including the PRC's founding in 1949 and its complex relationship with the Soviet Union.
-  The article also touches upon China's economic transformation and the current strengthened Sino-Russian partnership.
-  Key themes include the rewriting of history by the Chinese government, and the evolving relationship between China and other nations, particularly Russia.
-  The article uses historical images and quotes from experts to support its claims.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- Now, as the PRC celebrates its 75th anniversary, we wanted to revisit its past—and Chinese leaders’ efforts to rewrite it.
- As former Guardian China correspondent Tania Branigan put it , the Chinese Communist Party “sees history not as a record, still less a debate, but a tool.”   From Beijing-Moscow relations to China’s “economic miracle,” the essays below examine the PRC’s transformation over the past 75 years—and the histories that the state has sought to obscure.— Chloe Hadavas   On Oct.
- 1, 1949, Mao Zedong proclaimed the founding of the People’s Republic of China (PRC) from the top of Beijing’s Tiananmen Gate.
- Now, as the PRC celebrates its 75th anniversary, we wanted to revisit its past—and Chinese leaders’ efforts to rewrite it.

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
By submitting your email, you agree to the Privacy Policy and Terms of Use and to receive email correspondence from us.

You may opt out at any time.


 
 
 
 ✓ Signed Up 
 
 
 The People’s Republic of China Turns 75 
 
 Inside Beijing’s efforts to rewrite its history.


 
 
 
 Chinese People's Liberation Army honor guards stand in front of a mural of the Great Wall inside the Great Hall of the People in Beijing on Nov.

9, 2010.


 
Chinese People's Liberation Army honor guards stand in front of a mural of the Great Wall inside the Great Hall of the People in Beijing on Nov.

9, 2010.

FREDERIC J.

BROWN/AFP/Getty Images 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
October 13, 2024, 10:00 AM 
 
 View Comments 
 
 
 
 On Oct.

1, 1949, Mao Zedong proclaimed the founding of the People’s Republic of China (PRC) from the top of Beijing’s Tiananmen Gate.

Now, as the PRC celebrates its 75th anniversary, we wanted to revisit its past—and Chinese leaders’ efforts to rewrite it.

As former Guardian China correspondent Tania Branigan put it , the Chinese Communist Party “sees history not as a record, still less a debate, but a tool.” 
 From Beijing-Moscow relations to China’s “economic miracle,” the essays below examine the PRC’s transformation over the past 75 years—and the histories that the state has sought to obscure.— Chloe Hadavas 
 
 On Oct.

1, 1949, Mao Zedong proclaimed the founding of the People’s Republic of China (PRC) from the top of Beijing’s Tiananmen Gate.

Now, as the PRC celebrates its 75th anniversary, we wanted to revisit its past—and Chinese leaders’ efforts to rewrite it.

As former Guardian China correspondent Tania Branigan put it , the Chinese Communist Party “sees history not as a record, still less a debate, but a tool.” 
 From Beijing-Moscow relations to China’s “economic miracle,” the essays below examine the PRC’s transformation over the past 75 years—and the histories that the state has sought to obscure.— Chloe Hadavas 
 
 
 A landlord is executed near Fukang, Xinjiang, circa 1949.


 A landlord is executed near Fukang, Xinjiang, circa 1949.

Keystone/Hulton Archive/Getty Images 
 The People’s Republic of China Was Born in Chains 
 The Communist Party calls 1949 a liberation.

But China was far freer beforehand, Frank Dikötter writes.


 
 
 A historic image of Stalin and Mao in an office.


 Soviet leader Joseph Stalin and Chinese leader Mao Zedong meet in Moscow in December 1949.

Sovfoto/Universal Images Group via Getty Images 
 The Beijing-Moscow Axis Is Much Stronger This Time Around 
 The Sino-Russian partnership is tighter than the Sino-Soviet one, with no reason for a split any time soon, Jo Inge Bekkevold writes.


 
 
 Chinese President Xi Jinping takes his tea cup during the closing session of the National People's Congress at the Great Hall of the People on March 11, in Beijing, China.


 Chinese President Xi Jinping takes his tea cup during the closing session of the National People’s Congress at the Great Hall of the People on March 11, in Beijing, China.

Kevin Frayer/Getty Images 
 Xi Jinping Is Fighting a War for China’s History 
 Fear of “historical nihilism” has haunted China’s leadership for years, Katie Stallard writes.


 
 
 Paramilitary police officers march past the portrait of communist leader Mao Zedong on Tiananmen Gate 
 Paramilitary police officers march past the portrait of Chinese leader Mao Zedong on Tiananmen Gate as it undergoes renovations in Beijing on May 18, 2019.

Greg Baker/AFP via Getty Images 
 Mao’s Legacy Is a Dangerous Topic in China 
 Discussing the Cultural Revolution has become increasingly risky, Tania Branigan writes.


 
 
 Chinese People's Liberation Army honor guards stand in front of a mural of the Great Wall inside the Great Hall of the People in Beijing on Nov.

9, 2010.


 Chinese People’s Liberation Army honor guards stand in front of a mural of the Great Wall inside the Great Hall of the People in Beijing on Nov.

9, 2010.

FREDERIC J.

BROWN/AFP/Getty Images 
 China’s Vast History Can’t Be Caught in the CCP’s Net 
 There are 10,000 stories of China.

The government wants to tell only one of them, writes Jeannette Ng.


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chloe Hadavas is a senior editor at Foreign Policy .

X: @Hadavas

</CONTENT>
