<TITLE>Top Global Elections in 2025: Canada, Germany, Ecuador and More</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2025-01-02</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://foreignpolicy.com/2025/01/02/top-world-elections-2025-canada-germany-ecuador-australia-poland-bolivia/</URL>
<AUTHOR>Allison Meakem</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
2025 will see several key elections globally, including Ecuador's February 9th presidential and National Assembly election.
-  Ecuadorian President Daniel Noboa, the son of the country's wealthiest man, is seeking reelection.
-  The upcoming vote follows a tumultuous period in Ecuadorian politics, including the resignation of former President Guillermo Lasso and the dissolving of the legislature.
-  Globally, the article notes that the 2024 U.S.
- election is influencing other countries, with right-wing leaders potentially gaining ground in countries like the Czech Republic and Poland, while progressive leaders in other nations like Canada and Germany face challenges.
-  The article also mentions potential elections in South Korea if the Constitutional Court removes President Yoon Suk-yeol from office.
-  Ultimately, the article highlights the complex interplay between domestic and international political factors impacting elections worldwide in 2025.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- In terms of global elections, 2024 is a tough act to follow: It was a record-breaking voting bonanza , jam-packed with contests in major economies, including India, Mexico, Taiwan, and the United States.
-   This year is quieter, but it is by no means insignificant.
- Following Donald Trump’s victory in the U.S.
- presidential election last November, governments around the world are scrambling to reorient their politics.
- In some countries scheduled to hold votes in 2025, the specter of the president-elect’s foreign policy has spawned domestic turmoil, too.
-   In Berlin and Ottawa, existing cabinet disputes spiraled out of control after Trump’s win, leaving German Chancellor Olaf Scholz and Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau as de facto lame ducks.

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
In terms of global elections, 2024 is a tough act to follow: It was a record-breaking voting bonanza , jam-packed with contests in major economies, including India, Mexico, Taiwan, and the United States.


 
 This year is quieter, but it is by no means insignificant.

Following Donald Trump’s victory in the U.S.

presidential election last November, governments around the world are scrambling to reorient their politics.

In some countries scheduled to hold votes in 2025, the specter of the president-elect’s foreign policy has spawned domestic turmoil, too.


 In Berlin and Ottawa, existing cabinet disputes spiraled out of control after Trump’s win, leaving German Chancellor Olaf Scholz and Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau as de facto lame ducks.

Another key U.S.

ally, Japan, has had a minority government since last fall.


 Meanwhile, Australian Prime Minister Anthony Albanese put himself in Elon Musk’s crosshairs with a social media ban for children under 16—just as the tech billionaire is poised for influence in the White House.

And Singaporean Prime Minister Lawrence Wong has said he is “very concerned” about escalating U.S.-China competition and protectionism.


 Progressive leaders such as Scholz, Trudeau, and Albanese might rightly worry that the global resurgence of right-wing populism could threaten their holds on power this year; all three leaders are polling behind their center-right or right-wing rivals.

Add to that list Chilean President Gabriel Boric, who is ineligible for reelection and likely to have a conservative successor.


 Elsewhere, right-wing leaders are looking to the United States as a harbinger of success.

The Czech Republic’s opposition leader called Trump’s win a “boost” to his surging movement; Poland’s Law and Justice party has long been close to the president-elect.

Although conservative Ecuadorian President Daniel Noboa has not spoken publicly about Trump, he has taken a tough approach to crime and is keen to remain in Washington’s good graces for security assistance.


 Campaigns in other countries will be more insular.

Bolivia, Cameroon, and Tanzania have been led by the same political parties for decades; all have vast economic potential that has at times been dampened by domestic strife and political repression.

But machinations between longtime leaders and opposition movements promise interesting races, nonetheless.


 Some key votes may be declared later this year.

If South Korea’s Constitutional Court decides to remove President Yoon Suk-yeol from office, the country will promptly hold a presidential election.

Yoon was impeached in December after he declared martial law ; the court is now conducting its proceedings, which could take months.


 For now, here are 12 confirmed presidential and parliamentary elections to keep an eye on in 2025.


 
 Ecuador | Feb.

9 
 
 Daniel Noboa wears a suit as he walks amid a color guard.


 Ecuadorian President Daniel Noboa arrives at Carondelet Palace in Quito, Ecuador, on Oct.

17, 2023.

Franklin Jacome/Getty Images 
 President Daniel Noboa hopes to secure his first full term in Ecuador’s general election on Feb.

9.

All 151 seats in the country’s National Assembly are also up for grabs.


 The U.S.-educated son of Ecuador’s wealthiest man , Noboa came to office via a two-round snap election held in August and October 2023.

The vote followed the resignation of former President Guillermo Lasso, who dissolved the legislature to avoid being impeached .

Noboa was elected to finish Lasso’s term, which began in 2021.


 Like Lasso, Noboa is conservative, and he has focused his presidency on combating violent crime.

Ecuador has experienced rising insecurity and homicide rates as it has become a hot spot for cocaine trafficking in recent years.

While on the campaign trail in 2023, one of Noboa’s opponents was assassinated; Ecuador’s attorney general later linked the killing to criminal gangs.


 After a spate of attacks last January, Noboa declared Ecuador to be in an “ internal armed conflict ,” instituting a state of emergency and deploying troops to stabilize the country.

Months later, voters approved a Noboa-backed referendum to tighten security measures.

Despite the broad public support, legal experts and human rights activists worry that the measure could endanger due process and the rule of law.


 Ecuador is also wrestling with post-pandemic economic devastation .

With so much money devoted to fighting gangs, the government has even fewer resources to address its deficit.

Noboa has courted the United States , the International Monetary Fund, and others for help.

Last year, he secured more than $93 million in assistance from Washington, to be delivered over five years.


 What’s more, Noboa announced that he would propose a constitutional amendment to reauthorize the presence of foreign military bases on Ecuadorian soil.

Former Ecuadorian President Rafael Correa disallowed such bases in 2008, forcing the United States to shutter an outpost on Ecuador’s Pacific coast.


 Correa, accused of corruption by the U.S.

government, is currently living in exile in Belgium, but he still wields influence over Ecuador’s politics.

Luisa González, who served in Correa’s government from 2007 to 2017 and lost to Noboa in 2023, plans to run for president again this year.


 Also on the ballot is Leonidas Iza, who heads Ecuador’s powerful Indigenous confederation .

Controversial businessman Jan Topić is in the mix, too.


 Noboa’s approval rating has fallen in recent months, but polls still show him on top ahead of next month’s election.

He is trailed by González, Topić, and Iza.

If no candidate wins at least 40 percent of the vote with at least a 10-point lead in the first round , the top two candidates will proceed to a runoff on April 13.

Legislators are elected via a mixed-method proportional system .


 Return to Full List 
 
 Germany | Feb.

23 
 
 Olaf Scholz stands before a podium holding a piece of paper.


 German Chancellor Olaf Scholz addresses delegates in Berlin on Nov.

28, 2023.

TOBIAS SCHWARZ/AFP/Getty Images 
 Germany was due to hold a federal parliamentary election in late 2025, at the end of legislators’ four-year terms, but the collapse of Chancellor Olaf Scholz’s three-party governing coalition last November triggered an early contest, set for Feb.

23.


 Scholz succeeded longtime German Chancellor Angela Merkel in 2021, after Germany’s most recent nationwide election .

He soon set out to lead the federal government’s first-ever three-party coalition: a tumultuous union between his center-left Social Democratic Party (SPD), the neoliberal Free Democratic Party (FDP), and the Greens.


 The parties frequently sparred over matters including social welfare spending, defense and climate policy, and Germany’s longtime aversion to debt.

The infighting led to low approval ratings for the government and frequent demands for fresh elections .


 Last November, Scholz hit a breaking point with FDP chief and then-Finance Minister Christian Lindner, whom he fired over a budget disagreement.

The FDP exited the coalition, leaving Scholz with a minority government.

Reporting has since unearthed long-standing FDP plans to tank Scholz’s coalition.


 Despite public frustration with Scholz’s government, the coalition has guided Germany through a period of immense change.

Months after Scholz took office, Russia invaded Ukraine, and Germany began to boost its defense spending .

The country has also passed notable climate legislation and modernized its citizenship policy .


 Still, Germany today faces a dull economy and a welfare state that is struggling to accommodate an aging population.

Berlin is debating key geopolitical issues, too, including whether to decouple from China .

And the far-right Alternative for Germany (AfD) party, once taboo, is surging after winning an election in the state of Thuringia last year.


 Germany’s mainstream parties have nonetheless upheld their so-called firewall against the AfD on the state and national level.

The question heading into next month’s vote is whether that can continue—and which combination of parties could form a coalition government to keep the AfD out of power.


 Though Scholz lost a vote of confidence in the Bundestag, Germany’s lower house of parliament, last December, he is still the SPD’s candidate for chancellor.

The Greens have selected Vice Chancellor Robert Habeck .

The center-right Christian Democratic Union (CDU), currently in the opposition, is led by Friedrich Merz , who is more conservative than Merkel, the former CDU chancellor.


 Current polling shows the CDU ahead, followed by the AfD, SPD, and Greens.

It is unlikely that the FDP will surpass the 5 percent threshold needed to enter the Bundestag.

The body’s 733 seats are filled via a mix of direct mandates and proportional party representation.


 A potential spoiler is the Sahra Wagenknecht Alliance (BSW), a breakaway faction of the Left party that is conservative on social issues and opposes support for Ukraine.

In Brandenburg , the SPD and BSW recently formed a coalition to keep the AfD out of power; in Thuringia , the CDU, SPD, and BSW similarly came together to prevent the AfD from entering government.

February’s election will be the second time that the BSW competes nationwide, following last year’s European Parliament election.


 Return to Full List 
 
 Poland | by May 18 
 
 Andrzej Duda and Donald Tusk shake hands in front of Polish flags.


 Polish President Andrzej Duda (left) and Polish Prime Minister Donald Tusk shake hands during their meeting at the Presidential Palace in Warsaw, Poland, on Jan.

15, 2024.

WOJTEK RADWANSKI/AFP/Getty Images 
 Poland will elect a new president by May 18, though a date for the contest has yet to be declared.

President Andrzej Duda, first elected in 2015, is ineligible to run for another term.


 The vote is largely expected to be a duel between the Law and Justice (PiS) party, which backs Duda, and the big-tent Civic Coalition (KO), led by Prime Minister Donald Tusk.

The right-wing PiS was the standard-bearer of Polish politics for around a decade until the KO-led opposition managed to win the 2023 parliamentary elections .

Tusk and Duda have butted heads since, over matters from budgetary priorities to access to contraception.


 Poland’s president is not a strictly ceremonial role: The president governs alongside the prime minister and has the power to veto legislation and steer foreign policy.

When Duda served alongside PiS prime ministers from 2015 to 2023, the Polish government encroached on the independence of the country’s judiciary and media, earning scorn from the European Union.

PiS also steered hard-right social policies, demonizing LGBTQ+ people and restricting abortion rights .


 Tusk has sought to course-correct, but doing so has been difficult amid opposition from Duda.

Although both leaders were initially firm in their support for Ukraine and the trans-Atlantic defense alliance, some PiS politicians have begun to tire of unbridled support for Kyiv, particularly as many Ukrainian refugees have settled in Poland.


 The official campaign doesn’t kick off until Jan.

8, but a few candidates have already declared their intention to run.

The KO’s candidate is progressive Warsaw Mayor Rafal Trzaskowski , who lost narrowly to Duda in the 2020 presidential election.

PiS has tapped historian Karol Nawrocki to lead its ticket.

A smattering of candidates representing smaller parties are also in the mix.


 KO currently has a slight lead over PiS in national polls , and both are far ahead of all other parties—suggesting that the race will come down to a runoff between Trzaskowski and Nawrocki.

The election proceeds to a second round if no candidate earns a majority in the first.

Duda reportedly dislikes Nawrocki, so the campaign for PiS’s future is bound to be interesting.


 Return to Full List 
 
 Australia | expected in May 
 
 Anthony Albanese has his hands folded before him as he stands outside before the not-pictured media.


 Australian Prime Minister Anthony Albanese speaks at Parliament House in Canberra, Australia, on May 15, 2024.

Tracey Nearmy/Getty Images 
 Australia has not yet announced a date for its next federal election, but it is expected to be held in May.

That is because the country must hold elections at least once every three years, and the last one took place in May 2022.


 It’s too early to assess Prime Minister Anthony Albanese’s chances of keeping his post.

His center-left Labor Party currently trails the opposition center-right Liberal-National coalition slightly in polls , though not decisively enough to foreclose another Labor government.

As smaller parties gain traction, a hung parliament or minority government is also a possibility.


 Australian voters list health care, the economy , and housing access among their top concerns.

Albanese has guided Australia through a period of change following the country’s strict COVID-19 pandemic lockdown.

He patched up relations with China , which had deteriorated under Albanese’s conservative predecessor, and tightened Australia’s immigration system .


 The prime minister faced a setback in 2023, when voters rejected the creation of an Indigenous federal advisory body in a referendum.

Most recently, Albanese’s government moved to ban children under 16 from using social media , earning the ire of tech moguls such as Elon Musk .


 When the election does happen, all 150 seats in Australia’s House of Representatives and 40 of 76 Senate seats will be on the line.

Candidates are elected via a preferential ranked-choice voting system .

Members of the House serve three-year terms, while senators serve for either three or six years.


 Return to Full List 
 
 Japan | by July 27 
 
 Shigeru Ishiba stands before two microphones as he speaks.


 Japanese Prime Minister Shigeru Ishiba speaks to the media in Tokyo on Nov.

22, 2024.

STR/JIJI Press/AFP/Getty Images 
 The House of Councillors is the less powerful of the Japanese parliament’s two chambers, but an election for the upper house—held by July 27—may have consequences for the future of the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP), which has ruled the country for most of its postwar history.


 The House of Councillors has 248 members, all of whom are directly elected and serve six-year terms.

Half of the chamber’s seats are up for election every three years.


 Last October, Japan held snap elections for the lower House of Representatives after Shigeru Ishiba succeeded Fumio Kishida as LDP chief and prime minister.

Kishida left office amid a funding scandal and rising discontent with the party .

The conservative LDP and its coalition partner, Komeito, won a plurality of seats—but not enough for a majority.


 Analysts are uncertain about what this may mean for Japan’s political efficacy and international standing.

The House of Councillors cannot introduce legislation, but it can veto laws passed by the House of Representatives.

To override such a veto, the lower house must come up with a two-thirds majority vote; for Ishiba and the LDP, that would be virtually impossible.


 According to a November survey , 50 percent of Japanese disapprove of Ishiba’s cabinet, and only 31 percent support it.

If Japan’s opposition parties are able to muster strong support for the House of Councillors election, they could stymie much of Ishiba’s agenda.

The opposition camp is led by the center-left Constitutional Democratic Party of Japan.


 Return to Full List 
 
 Bolivia | Aug.

17 
 
 Evo Morales and Luis Arce laugh as they wear hats and bear colorful flags.


 Former Bolivian President Evo Morales (left) and Bolivian President Luis Arce lead a pro-government march in Caracollo, heading to La Paz, on Nov.

23, 2021.

AIZAR RALDES/AFP/Getty Images 
 Bolivia will hold a general election on Aug.

17, electing a president and both houses of parliament.

But the real contest may come before the vote itself, as two men fight for control of Bolivia’s ruling Movement for Socialism (MAS) party, which has governed the country for almost two decades.


 President Luis Arce intends to seek another term in office as MAS’s nominee, but he faces a challenge from former President Evo Morales.

The two former allies have become foes in recent years following a disputed presidential election in 2019.


 Morales, who served as president from 2006 to 2019 and was Bolivia’s first Indigenous leader, sought a fourth term in 2019.

At the time, the Bolivian Constitution allowed only two consecutive presidential terms; Morales’s third term was permitted because his first began prior to the adoption of the 2009 charter.

But Morales wanted to abandon term limits entirely.

In 2017, the country’s constitutional court controversially agreed to do so.


 Morales won the 2019 vote, yet amid allegations of voter fraud—both from Bolivia’s opposition and international actors—protests ramped up, and Morales fled to Mexico.

He and some observers still maintain that the former president faced a U.S.-backed coup attempt .

An interim president took office in Morales’s absence before Arce won a redo of the election a year later.


 The problems started once Morales returned to Bolivia in 2020 and sought to reclaim leadership of MAS.

Supporters of Morales and Arce have clashed violently ahead of the upcoming election, which both politicians want to contest.

In 2023, the constitutional court reinstated term limits , ruling that Morales cannot run again.

Morales claims that Arce and the courts are conspiring to keep him out of power—and he seems set on retribution.


 In the time since, there has been a dubious short-lived coup attempt against Arce, a hunger strike by Morales, and statutory rape allegations against Morales.

Last November, Morales supporters’ demonstrations paralyzed much of the country.


 The rift has overshadowed some of Arce’s accomplishments .

Last year, Bolivia became a member of the South American customs union, Mercosur, and made a significant natural gas discovery.

(It also has large lithium reserves.) Taken together, the developments suggest that the poor country could have a brighter future ahead.


 Candidates have not yet registered for Bolivia’s presidential election .

If no candidate wins at least 40 percent of the vote with at least a 10-point lead on Aug.

17, the top two candidates will proceed to a runoff.

Legislators are elected via a mix of proportional representation and direct mandates.

The Senate has 36 seats; seven out of 130 seats in the Chamber of Deputies are reserved for Indigenous peoples.


 Return to Full List 
 
 Cameroon | by October 
 
 Paul Biya faces the camera as he stands before two microphones.


 Cameroonian President Paul Biya takes part in a news conference in Yaounde, Cameroon, on July 26, 2022.

Stephane Lemouton/ABACAPRESS.COM 
 Longtime Cameroonian leader Paul Biya—the world’s oldest head of state—is expected to run again in the country’s presidential election, which media reports suggest will be held by October.

He will be 92 years old at the time of the contest.


 Biya and his Cameroon People’s Democratic Movement have been in power since 1982; they stand accused of rigging elections and repressing opposition parties .

Biya’s government is backed by the United States, which sees Cameroon as a key partner in counterterrorism efforts .

Biya has a clear path to reelection—even if it is not free or fair.


 Biya’s biggest domestic challenge in the past decade has been Cameroon’s Anglophone crisis .

Since 2017, the French-speaking government has fought Anglophone insurgents in a conflict that is a vestige of colonial rule .

Around 80 percent of Cameroon’s population is French-speaking, while 20 percent is English-speaking.

The crisis has displaced more than half a million people and killed thousands more.


 Cameroon elects its president by a first-past-the-post system , where the candidate with the most votes wins—with or without a majority.

Biya w

</CONTENT>
