<TITLE>Afghan Taliban hit ‘several points’ in Pakistan in retaliation for attacks</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2024-12-28</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2024/12/28/afghan-taliban-hit-several-points-in-pakistan-in-retaliation-for-attacks</URL>
<AUTHOR>Al Jazeera</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
Afghan Taliban forces targeted "several points" in Pakistan in retaliation for Pakistani air strikes inside Afghanistan.
-  The Afghan Defense Ministry stated the attacks were beyond a disputed border, the Durand Line.
-  No specific details of casualties or locations were released.
-  A Pakistani security source reported at least one soldier killed and seven wounded in cross-border fire.
-  Tensions between the two countries are high, with the Taliban accusing Pakistan of killing civilians in recent air strikes, and Pakistan blaming Afghan-based militants for attacks on their territory.
-  The relationship between Afghanistan and Pakistan has deteriorated significantly in recent months due to increased violence.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
-  Asked whether the statement referred to Pakistan, ministry spokesman Enayatullah Khowarazmi said: “We do not consider it to be the territory of Pakistan, therefore, we cannot confirm the territory, but it was on the other side of the hypothetical line.”   Afghanistan has for decades rejected the border, known as the Durand Line, drawn by British colonial authorities in the 19th century through the mountainous and often lawless tribal belt between what is now Afghanistan and Pakistan.
-   No details of casualties or specific areas targeted were provided.
- The Pakistani military’s public relations wing and a spokesperson for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs did not immediately respond to requests for comment.
-   Al Jazeera’s Abid Hussain, reporting from Islamabad on Saturday afternoon, said there had been no official response from the Pakistani authorities on the attacks.
- 

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
The attacks come days after the Taliban pledged retaliation for Pakistani air strikes inside Afghanistan.

Afghan Taliban forces have targeted “several points” in neighbouring Pakistan, Afghanistan’s Ministry of Defense said, days after Pakistani aircraft carried out aerial bombardments inside the country.


 The statement from the defence ministry on Saturday did not directly specify that Pakistan was hit, but said the attacks were conducted “beyond the ‘hypothetical line'” – an expression used by Afghan authorities to refer to a border with Pakistan that they have long disputed .


 “Several points beyond the hypothetical line, serving as centres and hideouts for malicious elements and their supporters who organised and coordinated attacks in Afghanistan, were targeted in retaliation from the southeastern direction of the country,” the ministry said.


 Asked whether the statement referred to Pakistan, ministry spokesman Enayatullah Khowarazmi said: “We do not consider it to be the territory of Pakistan, therefore, we cannot confirm the territory, but it was on the other side of the hypothetical line.” 
 Afghanistan has for decades rejected the border, known as the Durand Line, drawn by British colonial authorities in the 19th century through the mountainous and often lawless tribal belt between what is now Afghanistan and Pakistan.


 No details of casualties or specific areas targeted were provided.

The Pakistani military’s public relations wing and a spokesperson for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs did not immediately respond to requests for comment.


 Al Jazeera’s Abid Hussain, reporting from Islamabad on Saturday afternoon, said there had been no official response from the Pakistani authorities on the attacks.


 A security source told the AFP news agency that at least one Pakistani paramilitary soldier was killed and seven others wounded in cross-border exchanges of fire with Afghan forces.


 Sporadic clashes, including with heavy weaponry, erupted overnight between border forces on the frontier between Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province in Pakistan and Khost province in Afghanistan, officials from both countries said.


 The incidents come after Afghanistan’s Taliban authorities accused Pakistan of killing 46 people, mainly women and children, in air strikes near the border this week.


 Islamabad said it had targeted hideouts of fighters along the border, while Afghan authorities warned on Wednesday they would retaliate.


 The neighbours have a strained relationship, with Pakistan saying that several attacks on its territory have been launched from Afghan soil – a charge the Afghan Taliban denies.


 The Tehreek-e-Taliban Pakistan (TTP) – which shares a common ideology with its Afghan counterparts – last week claimed a raid on an army outpost near the border with Afghanistan, which Pakistan said killed 16 soldiers.


 “We desire good ties with them [Afghanistan] but TTP should be stopped from killing our innocent people,” Pakistan’s Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif said in a cabinet address on Friday.


 “This is our red line.” 
 Al Jazeera’s Hussain explained that Pakistan had hoped for good relations with the Taliban after the group’s 2021 takeover of Afghanistan – and for attacks by TTP in Pakistan to be controlled.


 But the relationship has deteriorated amid the uptick in violence.


 Hussain said more than 950 Pakistanis, including security personnel and civilians, have been killed in 2024 alone.

</CONTENT>
