<TITLE>More than 100 Palestinians killed in Israeli attacks on Gaza in 48 hours</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2024-11-23</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2024/11/23/more-than-100-palestinians-killed-in-israeli-attacks-on-gaza-in-48-hours</URL>
<AUTHOR>Al Jazeera</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
At least 120 Palestinians were killed in Israeli attacks on Gaza in the past two days, according to Palestinian health officials.
-  The attacks, including strikes on a residential home and a hospital (Kamal Adwan), have caused significant damage and injuries to medical personnel.
-  Israeli forces deny targeting the hospital.
-  Gaza's hospitals are running low on fuel and facing restrictions.
-  The UN warns of a potential famine in northern Gaza due to a lack of aid.
-  The Israeli military's offensive aims to stop Hamas fighters, but has led to a devastating humanitarian crisis, with thousands killed and injured since October 2023.
-  A Hamas spokesperson reported the death of an Israeli captive in northern Gaza.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
-  In a call with Defence Minister Israel Katz on Saturday, United States Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin pressed Israel to “take steps to improve the dire humanitarian condition in Gaza”, the Pentagon said.
-   Israel’s assault on Gaza has killed more than 44,000 people and wounded more than 104,000 since October 2023, according to Palestinian health officials.
-   Israel launched its assault on Gaza after the Hamas-led attacks on southern Israel on October 7, 2023, in which at least 1,139 people were killed and about 250 others seized as captives.
-   A spokesperson for the armed wing of Hamas, Abu Ubaida, said later on Saturday that a female Israeli captive in the group’s custody had been killed in northern Gaza in an area under attack by Israel’s forces.
-   “The life of another female prisoner who used to be with her remains in imminent danger,” he added, accusing the government of Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of being responsible and of undermining efforts to end the war.

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
Director of the Kamal Adwan hospital says several staff wounded in Israeli bombardment.

At least 120 people have been killed in Israeli attacks on Gaza in two days, Palestinian health officials said, as Israel intensified its bombardment across the besieged territory.


 At least seven people were killed when a residential home was hit overnight in the Zeitoun suburb of Gaza City, health officials said on Saturday.

The other deaths were recorded in central and southern Gaza.


 Israeli air raids caused significant damage to al-Faruq Mosque in the Nuseirat refugee camp in central Gaza, according to a social media video verified by Al Jazeera.


 Israeli forces also deepened their ground offensive and bombardment of northern Gaza, where one of the last partially operating hospitals was hit, wounding several workers.


 Hussam Abu Safia, director of the Kamal Adwan Hospital, said in a statement on Saturday that Israeli forces “directly targeted the entrance to the emergency and reception area several times, as well as the hospital courtyards, electrical generators, and hospital gates”.


 The bombardment “resulted in 12 injuries among doctors, nurses, and administrative staff within the emergency and reception areas”, he said.


 The Israeli military rejected the allegations and said it was “not aware of a strike in the area of the Kamal Adwan Hospital” following an initial review of the situation.


 On Friday, Gaza’s Ministry of Health said hospitals have fuel left for only about two days before it needs to start restricting services.


 Israel’s military imposed a siege and launched a renewed ground offensive in northern Gaza last month, saying it aimed to stop Hamas fighters from waging more attacks and regrouping in the area.


 The United Nations warned earlier this week that almost no aid had been delivered to northern Gaza since Israel’s renewed offensive as aid groups and food security experts warn of a famine in the area.


 In a call with Defence Minister Israel Katz on Saturday, United States Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin pressed Israel to “take steps to improve the dire humanitarian condition in Gaza”, the Pentagon said.


 Israel’s assault on Gaza has killed more than 44,000 people and wounded more than 104,000 since October 2023, according to Palestinian health officials.


 Israel launched its assault on Gaza after the Hamas-led attacks on southern Israel on October 7, 2023, in which at least 1,139 people were killed and about 250 others seized as captives.


 A spokesperson for the armed wing of Hamas, Abu Ubaida, said later on Saturday that a female Israeli captive in the group’s custody had been killed in northern Gaza in an area under attack by Israel’s forces.


 “The life of another female prisoner who used to be with her remains in imminent danger,” he added, accusing the government of Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of being responsible and of undermining efforts to end the war.

</CONTENT>
