<TITLE>World reacts to ICC arrest warrants for Israel’s Netanyahu, Gallant</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2024-11-21</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2024/11/21/world-reacts-to-icc-arrest-warrants-for-israels-netanyahu-gallant</URL>
<AUTHOR>Al Jazeera</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
The International Criminal Court (ICC) issued arrest warrants for Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and former Defense Minister Yoav Gallant, accusing them of war crimes related to alleged deprivations of essential resources in Gaza.
-  Hamas welcomed the warrants, while Israeli officials condemned them as "anti-Semitic" and comparable to the Dreyfus affair.
-  The ICC also issued a warrant for Hamas military chief Mohammed Deif.
-  Reactions varied globally, with some nations expressing disagreement, and others supporting the ICC's decision.
-  Residents in Gaza expressed skepticism about the potential outcome, noting past US support for Israel.
-  The Palestinian Authority voiced support for the decision, urging other countries to enforce the arrest warrants.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
-  A government spokesperson says Germany will “carefully examine” the ICC’s arrest warrants for Netanyahu and Gallant, but will not take further steps until a visit to the country.
-   “The Federal Government was involved in the drafting of the ICC Statute and is one of the ICC’s biggest supporters.
- This position is also a result of German history,” the spokesperson said.
-   “At the same time, a consequence of German history is that we have a unique relationship and a great responsibility to Israel.”   Foreign Minister Peter Szijjarto condemned the ICC decision, calling it “shameful and absurd”, presidential spokesperson Zoltan Kovacs reported on X.
- 

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
The International Criminal Court (ICC) has issued arrest warrants for Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and former Defence Minister Yoav Gallant for alleged “war crimes”.


 The court said on Thursday that there were “reasonable grounds” to believe Netanyahu and Gallant “intentionally and knowingly deprived the civilian population in Gaza of objects indispensable to their survival”.


 The ICC also issued an arrest warrant for Hamas military chief Mohammed Deif for alleged “crimes against humanity and war crimes”.

Israel said in August that Deif was killed in an air strike in southern Gaza the previous month.


 ICC Prosecutor Karim Khan first applied for the warrants six months ago.

In August, Khan called on the court to make a decision, saying, “Any unjustified delay in these proceedings detrimentally affects the rights of victims.” 
 Since the decision was announced, Israeli officials have slammed the warrants, with Israeli Transportation Minister Miri Regev referring to them as “modern anti-Semitism in the guise of justice”.


 Here are some of the key reactions to the ICC decision: 
 Israel 
 Netanyahu’s office rejected the decision and described the move as “anti-Semitic” in a statement.


 “Israel rejects with disgust the absurd and false actions levelled against it by ICC,” his office said, adding Israel won’t “give in to pressure” in defence of its citizens.


 In separate comments, Netanyahu’s office said the decision was comparable to “the modern-day Dreyfus trial – and it will end in the same way,” referring to Alfred Dreyfus, a Jewish army captain who was wrongly convicted of treason in France.


 Gallant said in a statement that he was proud of the privilege he had in leading Israel’s security and defence systems during a time of war, adding that Israel will continue this war until all of the objectives are met.


 Hamas 
 The group welcomed the decision to issue arrest warrants for Netanyahu and Gallant, calling it an “important step towards justice”.


 “[It’s] an important step towards justice and can lead to redress for the victims in general, but it remains limited and symbolic if it is not supported by all means by all countries around the world,” Hamas political bureau member Basem Naim said in a statement.


 Hamas also called on the ICC to expand its scope to other Israeli officials.


 The group did not mention the warrant for Deif.


 People in Gaza 
 Reporting from Deir el-Balah in central Gaza, Al Jazeera’s Hani Mahmoud said that residents remained sceptical.


 “It is taken with a little bit of scepticism… again, we know the unwavering American support [for Israel],” he said.


 “So people are very suspicious of the outcome of this arrest warrant and say that it might be challenged by the US administration, whether it is the [current] one or the [incoming administration], which has also vowed support to Israeli officials.” 
 The Palestinian Authority, which governs the occupied West Bank, said “the ICC’s decision represents hope and confidence in international law and its institutions”.


 It urged ICC members to enforce “a policy of severing contact and meetings’ with Netanyahu and Gallant.


 And here’s how countries around the world have reacted: 
 Argentina 
 President Javier Milei said on X that his country “declares its deep disagreement” with the decision.


 He wrote that the warrant “ignores Israel’s legitimate right to self- defence against the constant attacks by terrorist organisations like Hamas and Hezbollah”.


 Austria 
 Foreign Minister Alexander Schallenberg called the warrant incomprehensible and ludicrous, but his office also said as a party to the Rome statutes Austria was obliged to implement ICC arrest warrants.


 Belgium 
 “The fight against impunity wherever crimes are committed is a priority for Belgium, which fully supports the work of the [ICC]”, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs said on X.


 “Those responsible for crimes committed in Israel and Gaza must be prosecuted at the highest level, regardless of who committed them.” 
 Canada 
 “It’s really important that everyone abide by international law,” Prime Minister Justin Trudeau said, adding Canada would abide by rulings of international courts.


 European Union 
 Foreign policy chief Josep Borrell said the ICC warrants were not political and should be respected and implemented.


 “This decision is a binding decision and all states, all state parties of the court, which include all members of the European Union, are binding to implement this court decision,” he said.


 France 
 France would act “in line with the ICC’s statutes”, said Christophe Lemoine, spokesman for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.


 However, he declined to say whether France would arrest Netanyahu if he came to the country, saying it was “legally complex”.


 Germany 
 A government spokesperson says Germany will “carefully examine” the ICC’s arrest warrants for Netanyahu and Gallant, but will not take further steps until a visit to the country.


 “The Federal Government was involved in the drafting of the ICC Statute and is one of the ICC’s biggest supporters.

This position is also a result of German history,” the spokesperson said.


 “At the same time, a consequence of German history is that we have a unique relationship and a great responsibility to Israel.” 
 Hungary 
 Foreign Minister Peter Szijjarto condemned the ICC decision, calling it “shameful and absurd”, presidential spokesperson Zoltan Kovacs reported on X.


 “This decision disgraces the international judiciary by equating leaders of a country attacked by a heinous terror attack with the leaders of the terrorist organization responsible,” Szijjarto said, adding, “Such a decision is unacceptable.” 
 Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orban said he would invite Netanyahu to visit and defy the ICC arrest warrant.


 Orban called the ICC’s decision “outrageously brazen and “cynical”, saying it “intervenes in an ongoing conflict … dressed up as a legal decision, but in fact for political purposes”.


 Iran 
 The head of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) described the warrants against Netanyahu and Gallant as the “end and political death” of Israel, calling it a “regime that today lives in absolute political isolation in the world and its officials can no longer travel to other countries”.


 Ireland 
 Prime Minister Simon Harris said the warrants “an extremely significant step”.


 He added that Ireland respects the ICC’s role and that anyone in a position to assist it in carrying out its vital work must do so “with urgency.” 
 Italy 
 Foreign Minister Antonio Tajani said Rome would consider with allies how to interpret the decision and act together.

“We support the ICC … the court must play a legal role and not a political role,” he added.


 Jordan 
 Foreign Minister Ayman Safadi said the ICC’s decision must be respected and implemented.

“Palestinians deserve justice,” he said.


 The Netherlands 
 Foreign Minister Caspar Veldkamp said that his country “respects the independence of the ICC”.


 “We won’t engage in non-essential contacts and we will act on the arrest warrants.

We fully comply with the Rome Statute of the ICC,” he added.


 Norway 
 Foreign Minister Espen Barth Eide said, “It is important that the ICC carries out its mandate in a judicious manner.

I have confidence that the court will proceed with the case based on the highest fair trial standards.” 
 South Africa 
 In a statement, the government welcomed the ICC decision and said it marked a “significant step towards justice for crimes against humanity and war crimes in Palestine”.


 “South Africa reaffirms its commitment to international law and urges all state parties to act in accordance with their obligations in the Rome Statute,” it said.


 “We call on the global community to uphold the rule of law and ensure accountability for human rights violations.” 
 Sweden 
 Foreign Minister Maria Malmer Stenergard said Sweden and the EU “support the court’s important work and protect its independence and integrity”.

Swedish law enforcement authorities decide on the arrest of subjects of ICC warrants on Swedish territory, she added.


 Switzerland 
 The Swiss Federal Office of Justice said it is obliged to cooperate with the ICC under the Rome Statute and would therefore have to arrest Netanyahu, Gallant or Masri if they entered Switzerland and initiate extradition to the court.


 Turkey 
 Foreign Minister Hakan Fidan said the ICC arrest warrant was a “hopeful” and crucial step in bringing to justice Israeli authorities who committed “genocide” against Palestinians.


 “We will continue to work to ensure that international law is implemented to punish genocide,” Fidan added.


 United Kingdom 
 Britain respects the independence of the ICC, a spokesperson for Prime Minister Keir Starmer said without confirming whether Britain would uphold the warrants.


 United Nations 
 Secretary-General Antonio Guterres “respects the work and independence” of the ICC, said his spokesman Stephane Dujarric, when asked about warrants issued for Netanyahu and Gallant.


 Francesca Albanese, the UN’s special rapporteur on Palestine, called it a “rare moment of euphoria”.


 “I want to acknowledge the innumerable victims of too many wars on Gaza, and the indomitable work of Palestinian HR orgs … without whom the hope brought about by the ICC decision today, would have not come,” she said.


 United States 
 “The ICC issuance of arrest warrants against Israeli leaders is outrageous,” President Joe Biden said in a statement.


 “Let me be clear once again: whatever the ICC might imply, there is no equivalence – none – between Israel and Hamas.

We will always stand with Israel against threats to its security.” 
 The White House also expressed concern over “the Prosecutor’s rush to seek arrest warrants and the troubling process errors that led to this decision”.


 “The United States has been clear that the ICC does not have jurisdiction over this matter,” a National Security Council spokesperson said.


 US senator Bernie Sanders supported the warrants, saying “all launched indiscriminate attacks against civilians and caused unimaginable human suffering”.


 “If the world does not uphold international law, we will descend into further barbarism,” he said in a post on X.


 And here are some reactions from rights groups: 
 Amnesty International 
 The human rights organisation said on X that the “wheels of international justice have finally caught up with those alleged to be responsible for war crimes &amp; crimes against humanity in Palestine and Israel”.


 “There can be no ‘safe haven’ for those alleged to have committed war crimes and crimes against humanity,” it added.


 Human Rights Watch 
 “The ICC arrest warrants against senior Israeli leaders and a Hamas official break through the perception that certain individuals are beyond the reach of the law.”

</CONTENT>
