<TITLE>Forward to the Past? Regional Repercussions of the Gaza War</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2024-09-01</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/mepo.12758</URL>
<AUTHOR>Morten Valbjørn</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
The October 2023 Hamas attack on Israel and the ensuing Gaza war are prompting debate about the nature of regional change in the Middle East.
-  While some argue this conflict represents a fundamental shift, others contend that aspects like the return of the "Axis of Resistance" and renewed focus on Palestine resemble dynamics from before the 2011 Arab uprisings.
-  Key shifts include Saudi Arabia's warnings against escalation, US and allied bombing of the Houthi movement, and a potential re-convergence of Sunni and Shia Islamist groups, as major Sunni Hamas supporters are Shia movements in several countries.
-  The article argues that the war both revives and reconfigures the regional politics of the pre-2011 era,  emphasizing continuities alongside changes.
-  It contrasts the current situation with the post-2011 era, drawing parallels to the 2006 Israel-Hezbollah war to underscore the historical context.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- These similarities challenge recent claims that everything has been transformed.
- Still, this does not mean that nothing has truly changed, nor does it imply that the post-October 7 “new Middle East” will be a simple move “forward to the past.” The Economist may be correct when describing 2023 as “the year everything (and nothing) changed in the Middle East.” 4   Against this backdrop, we recall the late Fred Halliday's remark—made in the context of 9/11—that “there are two predictable, and nearly always mistaken, responses to any great international upheaval: one is to say that everything has changed; the other is to say that nothing has changed.” 5 Instead, this article explores the continuities in the apparent changes and the changes in the apparent continuities.
- We revisit the frameworks for understanding regional politics in the pre-2011 decade—as exemplified in the regional reactions to the 2006 Israel-Hezbollah war—to identify the dynamics of the earlier period and compare them to today.
- 6 The analysis reveals that the Gaza war, while reinvigorating the regional politics of the pre-2011 era, also reconfigures it.
- 

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
The October 7, 2023, Hamas attack on Israel and Israel's ensuing war on Gaza mark the end of the long decade following the Arab uprisings in the Middle East.

While there is broad consensus that the conflict represents a break with the regional dynamics of the last decade, the nature of this change is the subject of debate among scholars, practitioners, and policy makers.


 Some argue that the Gaza war between Israel and Hamas transforms everything and gives rise to a fundamentally new Middle East, though the specifics are contested.

1 A quick glance can identify changes that appear to have turned regional politics upside-down, particularly when compared to the post-2011 decade.

Saudi Arabia, which had been involved in a bloody conflict against the Houthi movement in Yemen since 2015, is now warning against escalation, while the United States and its allies have bombed the rebel group over its Red Sea attacks since early 2024.

In addition, the sectarianization of regional politics, a potent force during the post-2011 decade, seems now to be shifting.

Geneive Abdo declared in 2013 that the Sunni-Shia divide across the Middle East had supplanted Palestine as the central mobilizing factor in Arab politics.

2 This stands in glaring contrast to the current situation.

Not only does the Palestine issue figure again on top of the regional agenda; the war seems to have reunited Islamists regardless of sect.

3 Major regional supporters of Sunni Hamas are Shia movements in Iraq, Lebanon, Syria, and Yemen.

For their part, Saudi Arabia and Tehran appear to have grown closer, with the Iranian president, Ebrahim Raisi, having visited Riyadh in November 2023 after the Arab League summit was expanded to include the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.

Such high-level Iranian-Saudi visits were hard to imagine a decade earlier.


 Nevertheless, some shifts in regional politics appear far less novel, particularly if one broadens the perspective beyond the post-2011 decade.

While Palestine may not have figured prominently on the regional interstate agenda in the 2010s, it played a significant role throughout the 20th century and during the first decade of the new millennium.

As well, the so-called Axis of Resistance returned as a prominent factor, just as it was in the pre-2011 decade.

While Hamas, in the early years following the Arab uprisings, distanced itself from that camp due to the Syrian war, it has now fully re-engaged.

These similarities challenge recent claims that everything has been transformed.

Still, this does not mean that nothing has truly changed, nor does it imply that the post-October 7 “new Middle East” will be a simple move “forward to the past.” The Economist may be correct when describing 2023 as “the year everything (and nothing) changed in the Middle East.” 4 
 Against this backdrop, we recall the late Fred Halliday's remark—made in the context of 9/11—that “there are two predictable, and nearly always mistaken, responses to any great international upheaval: one is to say that everything has changed; the other is to say that nothing has changed.” 5 Instead, this article explores the continuities in the apparent changes and the changes in the apparent continuities.

We revisit the frameworks for understanding regional politics in the pre-2011 decade—as exemplified in the regional reactions to the 2006 Israel-Hezbollah war—to identify the dynamics of the earlier period and compare them to today.

6 The analysis reveals that the Gaza war, while reinvigorating the regional politics of the pre-2011 era, also reconfigures it.


 We first show how, before the Arab uprisings, Palestine played a critical role in shaping both regional and domestic politics.

Second, we demonstrate that, despite the seeming absence of Palestine in the post-2011 Middle East, the issue remains a prominent concern at the popular level, revealing a deep regimes-people divide.

Third, we explore the extent to which the Gaza war not only constitutes a break with regional politics since the Arab uprisings, but also a partial return to pre-2011 dynamics.

This has unraveled novel features roiling the Middle Eastern order.

In the conclusion, we draw on these analyses to explore possible ramifications for both regional and domestic politics in the Middle East over the years to come.


 
 
 PALESTINE IN REGIONAL POLITICS UNTIL THE 2011 UPRISINGS 
 “Palestine” has been at the center of Middle Eastern politics for most of the 20th and 21st centuries, at least until the 2011 Arab uprisings.

Between the post-WWI mandate system and the first Arab-Israeli war of 1948, the issue emerged as the central influence on regional and intra-Arab politics.

7 Since then, Israeli-Palestinian dynamics of conflict, violence, and peace have had major implications for Middle Eastern order and global relations—and vice versa.


 Beginning in the mid-20th century, regional politics were strongly influenced by Arab nationalism, understood as “the general idea about the existence of special bonds between Arabic-speaking people, who are assumed to be part of a single Arab nation constituted by common language, history, culture, and tradition.” 8 This supra-state identity meant that regimes had to balance a narrow “raison d’état” logic with the larger “raison de la nation Arabe.” This tension led to hefty intra-Arab debates about what constituted common interests.

Denouncing political rivals for not acting according to the larger “Arab cause” was a common strategy to weaken opponents and increase one's own legitimacy.

But Arab nationalism transcended boundaries and thrived on the connectedness between societies, with the Arab world constituting “a vast sound-chamber in which currents of thought, as well as information, circulated, and enjoyed considerable resonance across state frontiers.” 9 
 Palestine was at the heart of Arab regional politics during hot military conflicts between Israel, Palestinians, and Arab states—in 1948, 1956, 1967, 1973, 1982, 2006, and 2008–09—and cold episodes characterized by diplomatic and symbolic struggles among Arab states over regional hegemony and status.

Malcolm Kerr's study on the “Arab Cold War” of the 1950s and 1960s between conservative monarchies (Jordan, Saudi Arabia, and Iraq before 1958) and “radical” republics (Egypt, Syria, and Iraq post-1958) shows the centrality of Palestine as a reference point.

10 Arab politics could not be reduced to a mere reflection of extra-regional dynamics, like the global Cold War between the United States and the Soviet Union, or a product of domestic developments within Arab states.

Otherwise, coup attempts, interventions in other states, rapidly shifting alliances, and puzzling foreign-policy decisions could not be explained.


 Following the 1967 war, some observers argued that the importance of the Arab dimension in regional politics and of Palestine as an Arab symbol was in decline, if not over, especially with the increased role of oil-rich Gulf states and the Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty in 1979.

11 Such views not only underestimated the continued salience of an Arab supra-state identity among the Arab publics, they also conflated pan-Arabism as a scheme for political unity, such as Nasserism or Baathism, with a broader sense of Arab nationalism, which persisted into the 21st century.

The dominant form was a kind of political Arabism, defined by an understanding of “Arabs living in different states (being) linked by special bonds.

Arab politics should reflect this reality and accordingly be informed not only by a narrow self-interest but also comply with a number of distinct Arab norms.” 12 
 Despite the decline of Arabism at the state level, Palestine remained at the center of regional politics, and it figured prominently in how Arab regimes interacted with Israel.

Following the Egyptian-Israeli treaty of 1979, the Arab-Israeli conflict transformed from a zero-sum game into a dynamic of “land for peace” with an eye toward a two-state solution.

This transformation significantly shifted the Palestine issue.

In 1982, Saudi Arabia put forward the Fez plan, the first Arab proposal to offer recognition of Israel in return for the establishment of a Palestinian state defined by pre-1967 borders.

13 Following Operation Desert Storm in 1991, the United States sponsored peace negotiations in return for Arab regimes’ participation in the coalition to liberate Kuwait from Iraqi occupation.

These talks led to the Oslo Accords of 1993, which expressed the mutual recognition of Israel and the Palestinian Liberation Organization as the legitimate political representative of the Palestinian people.

The agreement was followed by the Jordanian-Israeli peace treaty in 1994.

14 
 Various Arab states, including Saudi Arabia, then tied normalization of their economic relations with Israel to the achievement of progress toward a Palestinian state.

However, the combined effects of the rapid rise of Israel's anti-peace right under Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, the buildup of illegal Jewish settlements, the increasing authoritarianism of the Palestinian Authority under Yasser Arafat, the suicide attacks of Hamas and other Palestinian organizations, and the declining engagement of US governments undermined the Oslo Accords, culminating in the second intifada in 2000.

Due to both that violent uprising and the 9/11 terrorist attacks, Saudi Arabia sponsored the 2002 Arab Peace Initiative, which called on Arab regimes to normalize relations with Israel in return for establishing a viable Palestinian state.

15 Despite its failure, the initiative helped keep the Palestine issue at the top of the regional agenda in the 2000s.


 The contours of Middle Eastern politics before the Arab uprisings are encapsulated by the reactions to the 2006 war between Israel and Hezbollah.

During 34 days of intense fighting, a symbolic rivalry emerged, with an array of actors trying to define the “common Arab interest” in order to discredit their rivals.

16 Hezbollah's leader, Hassan Nasrallah, portrayed the movement as aiming for Arab solidarity, resistance to occupation, and the liberation of Palestine.

Other members of the Axis of Resistance, like Hamas and Syria under President Bashar al-Assad, embraced similar goals.

On the other side, the so-called “moderate camp” composed of the pro-Western and status quo-oriented governments of Egypt, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia declared that Hezbollah's “adventurism” did “not serve Arab interests.” 17 
 This bipolar alliance structure in the 2000s is similar to that of Kerr's “Arab Cold War,” though the later period featured the emergence of nonstate Islamist actors as prominent players.

These examples also highlight the importance of an overarching Arab frame of reference.

Hezbollah's presenting itself as primarily Arab instead of Shia allowed it to gain massive backing across the region, not the least among Arab populations and Sunni movements, such as the Muslim Brotherhood, in countries like Egypt and Jordan.

Popular support for Hezbollah in the 2006 war put pressure on the moderate states to adjust their positions and public discourses, and those regimes gradually criticized Israeli actions to match domestic opinion.


 By the end of the 2000s, regional politics had changed from the heyday of pan-Arabism in the 1950s and 1960s.

Still, until the 2011 uprisings, regional dynamics were characterized by a complex interplay of states and nonstate, often Islamist, actors vying for influence.

All of this developed alongside a continued sense of political Arabism, especially at the popular level, with Palestine remaining a central symbol, reference point and, often, arena.


 
 
 THE ‘ABSENCE’ OF PALESTINE FROM REGIONAL POLITICS, 2011–23 
 The Arab uprisings constituted a turning point in modern Middle Eastern history.

18 Popular mobilizations across the Arab world ousted the leaders of Tunisia, Egypt, Libya, and Yemen, and civil wars broke out in the latter two states as well as Syria.

Politics were transformed throughout the post-2011 decade, with new conflicts replacing the Palestine issue as the central cleavage.


 The uprisings had a strong regional dimension.

Protesters across borders inspired each other and shared slogans and hashtags, with the primary emphasis on demands for freedom, democracy, and socioeconomic reform.

19 During later stages of the uprisings, characterized by authoritarian retrenchment, repression, civil wars, and proxy conflicts, domestic and regional politics continued to be intertwined, as in previous eras of Arab politics.

Rivalries played out as proxy wars within weak states’ domestic theaters, but unlike in the past, the Palestinian issue did not figure prominently.

20 Instead, the primary lines of division were determined by support for the Muslim Brotherhood or by what was described as the “sectarianization” of regional politics.

21 
 These changes were not only visible in the dominant rhetoric but also in the behavior of key actors.

For instance, Hamas left the Axis of Resistance, moving its external headquarters from Syria to Turkey and Qatar, and the popularity of Hezbollah in the Sunni Arab public evaporated due to its pro-Assad involvement in the Syrian war.

The rivalry between Iran and Saudi Arabia played out in various arenas, and a major rift emerged between Qatar, on one side, and Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, on the other.

In neither case did Palestine play a central role.


 The post-2011 regionalization of the Yemeni conflict illustrates this apparent absence of the Palestinian issue.

In the decade before the Arab uprisings, the Yemeni government under President Ali Abdullah Saleh engaged in numerous violent clashes with the Houthi movement, which originates from the Zaydi-dominated northern Saada region.

The Houthis gained support among those who felt economically neglected, politically excluded, and religiously marginalized.

22 Although Saudi Arabia had always played some role in the Saada conflict, this was first and foremost an intra-Yemeni affair.

However, following the Arab uprisings and after the Houthis took over the capital of Sanaa in 2014, the conflict became regionalized.

A coalition led by Saudi Arabia and the UAE intervened militarily against the Houthis, who in turn received support from Iran.

23 
 At first sight, the conflict might resemble Kerr's “Arab Cold War,” with Yemen a theater not only of civil war but also of regional rivalry, at that time between Egypt and Saudi Arabia.

24 On closer inspection, however, it becomes clear that the framing and alliance patterns were fundamentally different.

While the 1960s conflict was driven by classical Arab-nationalist frames, the post-2011 rivalry was defined by narratives in which both regional and local actors, often instrumentally, emphasized sect-specific identities to mobilize supporters and delegitimize opponents.

The Saudis, who backed the conservative Shia Zaydi imamate against the revolutionary republicans in the 1960s, were in the later conflict eager to frame their Houthi opponents as distinctly Shia.

Despite the traditional slogan of the Houthis—“God is the Greatest, Death to America, Death to Israel, a curse upon the Jews, Victory to Islam”—the Palestine issue did not motivate the combatants.


 In the early years of the 2020s, the Palestinian question and the Arab-Israeli cleavage seemed to have largely disappeared.

When Bahrain, Morocco, Sudan, and the UAE signed the Abraham Accords for normalization with Israel—without any promises regarding Palestine—reactions were muted among both the regimes and the publics.

25 Instead, these agreements were driven by the narrow interests of individual states.

Morocco received US recognition of its control over the Western Sahara; Sudan got off the terrorism list; Bahrain sought better relations with Washington; and the UAE received access to advanced technologies and beneficial trade relations with Israel.

26 Normalization between Saudi Arabia and Israel was more difficult but negotiations were ongoing.

27 A few years later, in the spring of 2023, Iran and Saudi Arabia agreed to a China-brokered rapprochement, while Assad's Syria was readmitted to the Arab League after a 12-year suspension due to violence against anti-regime protesters.

In none of these cases were Palestinian actors consulted or their issue considered salient.


 These developments, along with the “de-sectarianization” of regional politics, led to speculation about whether the region was leaving the long post-Arab uprisings decade to enter a new stage.

In September 2023, US National Security Adviser Jake Sullivan declared, “The Middle East region is quieter today than it has been in two decades.” 28 The Economist soon published a special feature on the “new Middle East,” arguing that the center of gravity had moved away from the Mashreq and toward the Gulf.

Normalization agreements and regional stability, including a Saudi-Israeli deal, were expected to replace the post-2011 focus on Islamism, sectarianism, protests, and proxy wars.

New forms of state-based identities were predicted, such as Saudi and Emirati neo-nationalism, which would be tied to socioeconomic reforms, futuristic mega-projects like NEOM, and infrastructure-led development like the India-Middle East-Europe Economic Corridor.


 During this period, the Palestine issue may seem to have been less central for regional rivalries as well as international actors.

But this does not mean its importance disappeared for all of them.

First, interest in and solidarity with Palestine remained prominent at the popular level.

During the 2010s and into the 2020s, opinion surveys in the Arab world showed that the issue was a major concern.

According to the Arab Opinion Index, a large majority, ranging between 75 percent and 92 percent, consistently saw “the Palestine cause as an Arab issue,” and between 84 percent and 89 percent of respondents opposed recognizing Israel.

29 Indeed, the Arab public remained “strongly supportive of the Palestinian cause,” according to the Arab Barometer surveys, “meaning that without a viable solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the vast majority are unlikely to support their countries making peace with Israel.” 30 Therefore, while Arab regimes persistently disengaged from Palestine, the issue remained highly salient among their citizens, reflecting a regimes-people divide.


 Second, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict was punctuated by several episodes of violence after the 2006 Hezbollah war and Gaza violence in 2008–9, and Arabs mobilized in support of Palestinians.

In November 2012, Gaza saw eight days of fighting after the killing of Hamas's military chief of staff, Ahmed Jabari.

Seven weeks of war in the summer of 2014, after Hamas kidnapped and killed three Israeli teenagers, left 2,100 Palestinians and 73 Israelis dead.

And in 2021, after violent skirmishes at al-Aqsa Mosque during Ramadan, 11 days of Israeli rocket assaults and air attacks on Gaza killed 260 Palestinians and 13 Israelis.

With the 2011 uprisings fresh in their minds, Arab regimes suppressed or at least severely restricted pro-Palestinian public opinion, fearing instability.

For instance, protests were allowed in Jordan, but they were more harshly policed than in the 1990s and 2000s.

31 Egypt was the exception that proved the rule, with President Mohamed Morsi of the Muslim Brotherhood leveraging public support in 2012 to end the fighting between the Israeli army and Hamas.

However, after the coup d’état by Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, the regime in 2014 banned large-scale pro-Palestinian protests and instituted a harsh crackdown on the Muslim Brotherhood.

Sisi declared Hamas to be an enemy and destroyed the tunnels that connected Egypt and the Gaza Strip.

32 
 Across the Middle East during the long decade after the Arab uprisings, attempts by authoritarian regimes to downplay the Palestine question and their increased repressio

</CONTENT>
