<TITLE>Chinese Weaponry in Contemporary Middle Eastern Conflicts</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2024-12-19</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/epdf/10.1111/mepo.12782?af=R</URL>
<AUTHOR></AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
This article analyzes the role of Chinese weaponry in contemporary Middle Eastern conflicts.
-  While Chinese arms sales have increased in the past decade, they remain less prevalent than those from the US and Russia.
-  Chinese-made weapons have been used in conflicts in Gaza, Syria, Yemen, Libya, and Lebanon, often due to affordability and improved quality.
-  However, the study argues that China has not intentionally targeted these conflict zones, with arms instead being redistributed by third parties.
-  The authors conclude that China's balanced approach to international relations has limited the impact of its weaponry in the region.
-  Critically, the study asserts China has not deliberately exported weapons to these regions, in contrast to the US and Russia.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- This research investigates the accuracy of these charges and assesses whether China's role should be considered prominent.
- The study examines weapons that have been used in five ongoing regional conflicts, including the Gaza war.
- It finds that, unlike Washington and Moscow, which have deliberately transferred military equipment to the region, China has avoided intentionally directing armaments to Middle Eastern conflict zones.
- Instead, Chinese arms have been redistributed by third parties.
- The analysis concludes that China's strategy of balancing its relationships across states in conflict has limited the amount of its weapons in the region and kept the impact of those armaments to a minimum.
- 

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
Font 
 
 
 
 check_circle 
 Default 
 
 
 Alegreya (serif) 
 
 
 Bitter (serif) 
 
 
 Noto Serif 
 
 
 Old Standard TT (serif) 
 
 
 Open Dyslexic 
 
 
 Open Sans 
 
 
 Roboto Mono (sans-serif) 
 
 
 
 
 
 Font Size 
 
 
 Alignment 
 
 
 
 
 Hyphenation 
 
 
 
 
 Reading Flow 
 
 
 
 Download 
 
You do not have permission to download this publication.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DETAILS 
 navigate_next 
 
 
 
 
 RELATIONS 
 
 navigate_next 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Details 
 
 
 
 
 ARTICLE 
 
 
 Chinese Weaponry in Contemporary Middle Eastern Conflicts 
 
 Yingliang Jia, Amin Parto, Shabnam Dadparvar 
 format_quote 
 CITE 
 
 
 
 Abstract 
 This article examines the role of Chinese armaments in recent Middle Eastern conflicts, showing that although their use has increased over the past decade, they remain less numerous or significant compared to those from the United States and Russia.

Chinese-made weapons have been used in conflicts in Gaza, Syria, Yemen, Libya, and Lebanon due to affordability, streamlined procurement processes, and improved quality.

China's critics have alleged that it has played a negative role in these conflicts through proliferation, claims that Beijing has consistently denied.

This research investigates the accuracy of these charges and assesses whether China's role should be considered prominent.

The study examines weapons that have been used in five ongoing regional conflicts, including the Gaza war.

It finds that, unlike Washington and Moscow, which have deliberately transferred military equipment to the region, China has avoided intentionally directing armaments to Middle Eastern conflict zones.

Instead, Chinese arms have been redistributed by third parties.

The analysis concludes that China's strategy of balancing its relationships across states in conflict has limited the amount of its weapons in the region and kept the impact of those armaments to a minimum.


 
 
 
 
 remove_from_queue 
 Relations for this publication are not available for display.


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Outline 
 
 Chinese Weaponry in Contemporary Middle Eastern Conflicts Abstract EVOLUTION OF CHINA’S ARMS-EXPORT POLICY THE HISTORY OF CHINESE ARMS IN MIDDLE EAST CONFLICTS CHINESE WEAPONS IN ONGOING REGIONAL CONFLICTS The Gaza War The Syrian Civil War Chinese Weaponry in Iraq The Civil War in Yemen Libyan Civil War CONCLUSION ACKNOWLEDGMENT ORCID 
 
 
 
 
 remove_from_queue 
 Figures cannot be displayed at the moment.


 
 
 perm_media 
 Supplementary materials for this publication are not available for display.


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Links 
 
 
 
 REFERENCES 
 navigate_next 
 
 
 
 
 CITED BY 
 navigate_next 
 
 
 
 
 RECOMMENDED 
 navigate_next 
 
 
 
 
 
 remove_from_queue 
 References for this publication are not available for display.


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This article is Free to Read.
 
Downloading and printing are disabled.
 
 
 Get full access 
 
 
 DOI: 10.1111/mepo.12782 O R I G I N A L A R T I C L E Chinese Weaponry in Contemporary Middle Eastern Conflicts Yingliang Jia Amin Parto Shabnam Dadparvar Dr.

Jia is associate professor in the History and Culture Department of Tianshui Normal University, Tianshui, Gansu, China.

Dr.

Parto holds a doctorate in political science from the University of Tehran, Iran.

Dr.

Dadparvar is associate professor in the History and Culture Department of Tianshui Normal University.

Correspondence Shabnam Dadparvar Shabnam.dadparvar@gmail.com Abstract This article examines the role of Chinese armaments in recent Middle Eastern conflicts, showing that although their use has increased over the past decade, they remain less numerous or significant compared to those from the United States and Russia.

Chinese-made weapons have been used in conflicts in Gaza, Syria, Yemen, Libya, and Lebanon due to affordability, streamlined procurement processes, and improved quality.

China’s critics have alleged that it has played a negative role in these conflicts through proliferation, claims that Beijing has consis- tently denied.

This research investigates the accuracy of these charges and assesses whether China’s role should be considered prominent.

The study examines weapons that have been used in five ongoing regional conflicts, including the Gaza war.

It finds that, unlike Washing- ton and Moscow, which have deliberately transferred military equipment to the region, China has avoided intentionally directing armaments to Middle Eastern conflict zones.

Instead, Chinese arms have been redis- tributed by third parties.

The analysis concludes that China’s strategy of balancing its relationships across states in conflict has limited the amount of its weapons in the region and kept the impact of those armaments to a minimum.

To understand the prevalence and significance of Chinese-made arms in the Middle East, researchers must consider the economic implications, China’s political strategy, and the impact of such weapons on the region’s rivalries and stability.

Until the end of the Cold War, Beijing MIDDLE EAST POLICY.

2024;31:37–55.

© 2024 The Middle East Policy Council.

37 wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/mepo 38 MIDDLE EAST POLICY viewed the Middle East mainly as a market for selling military equipment, mostly due to eco- nomic interests.

For instance, China provided substantial supplies of arms to both Iran and Iraq during the 1980s, even though they were fighting a devastating war against each other.

1 But as the Cold War waned, Beijing’s strategic interests shifted toward strengthening economic ties with the United States and influencing stability in the Middle East, as the region is crucial for China’s energy needs, investment, exports, and trade routes.

2 This prompted a substantial revision of its arms-export policy.

3 Since becoming a major global economic power, China has followed three principles in its arms exports to the Middle East: bolstering legitimate defense capabilities, avoiding interference in internal affairs, and ensuring the weapons do not threaten global or regional peace and security.

4 As part of its larger strategy, Beijing has at times used arms sales to try to prevent destabilization.

An example is its shifting of weapons to Saudi Arabia during some periods and to the kingdom’s adversaries in others.

In the 1980s, China provided DF-3 ballistic missiles to the Saudis to counter- balance Iran, and it reportedly sold DF-21 ballistic missiles in 2017 to help the kingdom enhance its offensive capabilities and deter adversaries.

5 Saudi Arabia also bought China’s advanced HQ-17 air defense system to counter drone attacks from foes such as the Yemen-based Houthis.

6 On the other side of the ledger, Beijing’s sale of BP-12A (CH-SS-14 mod 2) short-range ballistic missiles to Qatar in 2017 aimed to support the gas-rich monarchy and deter its adversaries, including Saudi Arabia.

7 Still, China’s flow of weapons to the region is dwarfed by that of the United States, Russia, and even Europe.

Some Chinese-made armaments do have the potential to threaten global and regional peace and security.

Examples include land-attack cruise missiles, heavy-warhead ballistic missiles with the capacity for a nuclear payload, hypersonic missiles, hypersonic anti-ship missiles, strategic or tactical bomber aircraft such as the H-6 and JH-7, and nuclear-powered submarines featuring nuclear propulsion systems.

China has refrained from selling such equipment to countries like Pakistan, Iran, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates (UAE).

The armaments that it has sold, such as ballistic missiles, are not capable of carrying unconventional weapons, which reduces potential risks.

Still, in contrast to earlier analyses attributing China’s decreased exports to its purported inability to produce sophisticated and high-quality weaponry, Chinese armaments have become 1 Degang Sun, “China’s Military Relation with the Middle East,” in The Red Star and the Crescent: China and the Middle East , ed.

James Reardon-Anderson (New York: Oxford University Press, 2018).

2 Maria Mary Papageorgiou, “China’s Growing Presence in the Middle East’s Arms Race and Security Dynamics,” in The Arms Race in the Middle East: Contemporary Security Dynamics , ed.

Mohammad Eslami and Alena Vysotskaya Guedes Vieira (Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2023), 259.

3 Dennis van Vranken Hickey, “New Directions in China’s Arms for Export Policy: An Analysis of China’s Military Ties with Iran,” Asian Affairs: An American Review 17, no.

1 (Spring 1990), 15.

4 Hiddai Segev and Ofek Riemer, “Not a Flood, but a Rising Current: Chinese Weapons Sales to the Middle East,” in Israel- China Relations , INSS memorandum no.

194 (August 2019), ed.

Assaf Orion and Galia Lavi, https://www.inss.org.il/wp- content/uploads/2019/08/Not-a-flood.pdf, 92.

5 Michael Young, “Going Ballistic,” Diwan , January 10, 2022, https://carnegie-mec.org/diwan/86158.

6 Global Defense, “Saudi Arabia Parades Chinese HQ-17AE Air Defense Systems,” August 21, 2021, https://www.

globaldefensecorp.com/2021/08/21/saudi-arabia-parades-hq-17ae-air-defense-systems.

7 Stijn Mitzer and Joost Oliemans, “Qatar’s Purchase of BP-12A SRBMs: A Guppy Sprouts Teeth,” Oryx, March 6, 2021, https://www.oryxspioenkop.com/2021/03/qatars-purchase-of-bp-12a-srbms-guppy.html.


 
 
 
Need Help?
 
 
 Tips
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 chapter title
here 
 
 
 figure title
here 
 
 
 
 
 figure title here 
 
 
 All Materials 
 publication
title here

</CONTENT>
