<TITLE>The US is electing a wartime president</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2024-10-19</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/content-series/inflection-points/the-us-is-electing-a-wartime-president/</URL>
<AUTHOR>jcookson</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
The upcoming US presidential election is taking place during a perilous geopolitical moment, comparable to the pre-World War II era.
-  The article argues that the election will effectively choose a wartime president, given the growing global conflict and the potential for a new axis of aggressors (China, Russia, Iran, and North Korea).
-  Neither candidate has adequately addressed the strategy needed to combat this unprecedented threat.
-  The author likens the current situation to the 1940s, when FDR navigated a similar isolationist climate towards eventual war.
-  Experts predict a high likelihood of global warfare, with the next three years posing a significant risk.
- The US faces challengers in Putin and Xi Jinping who might exploit internal distractions and a perceived weakness in the US defense sector.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
-  This edition is part of Frederick Kempe’s Inflection Points newsletter, a column of dispatches from a world in transition.
- To receive this newsletter throughout the week, sign up here .
-  A consensus among experts is emerging that AI’s chief short-term impact on elections will not be to create wholly new problems but rather to make previous threats more common and easier to carry out by a wider array of actors, leading to a higher volume of disinformation, cyberattacks, and other issues.
-   Image: US President Barack Obama 's lecturn is pictured on stage before a town hall meeting about his new Small Business Lending Fund at Nashua High School North in New Hampshire, February 2, 2010.REUTERS/Jason Reed

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
Americans on November 5 will be electing a wartime president.

This isn’t a prediction.

It’s reality.


 Neither candidate has yet spoken plainly enough to the American people about the perils represented by the growing geopolitical and defense industrial collaboration among China, Russia, Iran, and North Korea.

This axis of aggressors may be unprecedented in the potential peril it represents.


 Neither candidate has outlined the sort of generational strategy that will be required by the United States to address this challenge.

Irrespective of whether former President Donald Trump or Vice President Kamala Harris is elected, this will be the unavoidable context of their presidency.

One will become commander-in-chief at the most perilous geopolitical moment since the Cold War—and perhaps since World War II.


 In that spirit, Washington Post columnist George F.

Will this week compared the 2024 US elections to the 1940 US elections, when the United States hadn’t yet formally declared war on Imperial Japan, Hitler’s Germany, or Mussolini’s Italy.


 What was different then was that one of the two candidates, incumbent President Franklin Delano Roosevelt, sensed he was about to become a wartime president and was acting like it.

FDR, wrote Will, “was nudging a mostly isolationist nation toward involvement in a global conflict” with his 1937 “ quarantine speech ” on aggressor nations and through his subsequent military buildup.


 FDR’s opponent was Republican businessman Wendell Willkie, who like FDR was more internationalist than isolationist, in the tradition of his party’s elites of that time.

“In three weeks,” Will writes, “Americans will not have a comparably reassuring choice when they select the president who will determine the nation’s conduct during World War III, which has begun.” 
 The point is that just as World War II began with “a cascade of crises,” initiated by the coalescing axis of Japan, Germany, and Italy, so today there is a similar axis—China, Russia, Iran, and North Korea.

Will reckons our current global crisis began no later than Russia’s 2014 seizure of Crimea.


 This isn’t the first time that I have quoted diplomat-historian Philip Zelikow in this column .

Writing in Texas National Security Review this summer, Zelikow reckoned that the next president has a 20-30 percent chance of being involved in worldwide warfare, which he differentiates from a world war in that not all parties will be involved in every aspect or region.


 Zelikow, who recently expanded on these ideas among experts at the Atlantic Council, reckons that the next three years mark a moment of maximum danger.

Should the United States navigate this period successfully, alongside global allies and partners, the underlying strengths of the American economy, defense industry, tech, and society should kick in and show their edge over those of the authoritarians.


 The problem in the short term is that the United States is facing challengers in Russian President Vladimir Putin and Chinese leader Xi Jinping, who may see a window of opportunity in the United States’ domestic distractions, a defense sector not yet adequate for emerging challenges, and an electorate that questions the value and necessity of US international engagement.

Both leaders might calculate that acting more forcefully against Ukraine and Taiwan now could produce a greater chance of success than a few years in the future.


 Wrote George Will: “From Russia’s western border to the waters where China is aggressively encroaching on Philippine sovereignty, the theater of today’s wars and almost-war episodes spans six of the globe’s 24 time zones.” He says this is what “the gathering storm” of world war looks like, borrowing the title of the first volume of Winston Churchill’s World War II memoirs.


 Will charges the two presidential candidates with “reckless disregard” for failing to provide voters “any evidence of awareness, let alone serious thinking about, the growing global conflagration.” 
 If that sounds like hyperbole to you, it’s worth reading FDR’s third inaugural address in January 1941, almost a year before the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, which prompted Congress to declare war on Japan the following day.


 “To us there has come a time,” said Roosevelt, “in the midst of swift happenings, to pause for a moment and take stock—to recall what our place in history has been, and to rediscover what we are and what we may be.

If we do not, we risk the real peril of isolation, the real peril of inaction.

Lives of nations are determined not by the count of years, but by the lifetime of the human spirit.” 
 War isn’t inevitable now any more than it was then.

When disregarded, however, gathering storms of the sort we’re navigating gain strength.


 “In the face of great perils never before encountered,” Roosevelt concluded, “our strong purpose is to protect and to perpetuate the integrity of democracy.

For this we muster the spirit of America, and the faith of America.” 
 
 Frederick Kempe is president and chief executive officer of the Atlantic Council.

You can follow him on X: @FredKempe .


 This edition is part of Frederick Kempe’s Inflection Points newsletter, a column of dispatches from a world in transition.

To receive this newsletter throughout the week, sign up here .


 Further reading 
 
 
 
 
 Thu, Oct 17, 2024 
 Apocalypse later? 
 
 The Big Story 
 By 
 By Dean Jackson and Meghan Conroy 
 
 
A consensus among experts is emerging that AI’s chief short-term impact on elections will not be to create wholly new problems but rather to make previous threats more common and easier to carry out by a wider array of actors, leading to a higher volume of disinformation, cyberattacks, and other issues.


 
 
 Image: US President Barack Obama 's lecturn is pictured on stage before a town hall meeting about his new Small Business Lending Fund at Nashua High School North in New Hampshire, February 2, 2010.REUTERS/Jason Reed

</CONTENT>
