<TITLE>Experts react: Rebels have toppled the Assad regime. What’s next for Syria, the Middle East, and the world?</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2024-12-08</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/blogs/new-atlanticist/experts-react/experts-react-rebels-have-toppled-the-assad-regime-whats-next-for-syria-the-middle-east-and-the-world/</URL>
<AUTHOR>jcookson</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
Syrian rebel groups quickly toppled the Assad regime, marking a dramatic shift in the Middle East's power balance.
-  Bashar al-Assad abdicated and left the country, according to Russia.
-  Experts predict a reshuffling of regional power dynamics, impacting Iran, Hezbollah, Russia, and the US.
-  The future of Russian bases, US-backed forces, and interim governance in Syria are uncertain.
-  The article highlights various potential scenarios for Syria's future, including normalization with Israel and reshaping of regional relations.
-  Experts emphasize the need for a new US strategy to navigate the changed landscape.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- Below, our experts answer these urgent questions and others.
-   Rich Outzen: The Middle East’s power balance has rapidly shifted.
- The US will need a new strategy.
-   Qutaiba Idlbi: Assad’s fall is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity for the region   Jonathan Panikoff: A moment for Israel and Gulf states to reshape the region’s future rather than react to it 

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
The road to Damascus was surprisingly short.

On Sunday, Syrian rebel groups took control of the capital after a lightning-fast offensive across the country.

Dictator Bashar al-Assad abdicated power and left Syria, according to Russia , his most powerful patron.

How did this happen so swiftly after such a long period of stasis in Syria’s thirteen-year civil war? And what comes next for Syria, the Middle East, and the external powers that have been shaping events there? Below, our experts answer these urgent questions and others.


 Click to jump to an expert analysis: 
 Rich Outzen: The Middle East’s power balance has rapidly shifted.

The US will need a new strategy.


 Qutaiba Idlbi: Assad’s fall is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity for the region 
 Jonathan Panikoff: A moment for Israel and Gulf states to reshape the region’s future rather than react to it 
 Gissou Nia: Assad should still be held accountable under international law.

Here’s how.


 R.

Clarke Cooper: Russia is losing its Middle Eastern power projection—and great-power claims 
 Mark N.

Katz: Assad’s fall may not be a total loss for Putin 
 Danny Citrinowicz: With its proxies crumbling, Iran will rethink its security strategy 
 Emily Milliken: Will Yemen’s Houthi rebels be the next Iranian proxy to fall? 
 Thomas S.

Warrick: Postwar planning for Syria is now at the top of the agenda 
 Arwa Damon: Among Syrians, there is a sense that nothing is guaranteed and everything is possible 
 Sarah Zaaimi: The new Syria could normalize relations with Israel and reshuffle the region 
 Richard LeBaron: Arab leaders won’t like the shattering of Syrian stability 
 Karim Mezran: Libya offers important lessons for Syria’s next steps 
 Joze Pelayo: The new Syria can be a friend to the US—if the Trump administration seizes the moment 
 Alex Plitsas: There is much to be done to prevent a terror sanctuary from emerging 
 Nicholas Blanford: Hezbollah is now in the worst position of its four-decade history 
 Daniel Mouton: There are three scenarios for Syria’s future—and the US can shape which one emerges 
 Alia Brahimi: The lesson for other Arab regimes—illegitimate governments cannot be propped up forever 
 
 The Middle East’s power balance has rapidly shifted.

The US will need a new strategy.


 The fall of the Assad regime less than two weeks into a coordinated assault by a broad array of opposition groups has, with shocking speed, changed the map and power balance in the Middle East and beyond.

The long suffering of the Syrian people under a brutal regime that killed, tortured, dispossessed, and exiled millions of its people has ended.

The Iranian hegemonic project in Syria, too, has ended, and with it Hezbollah’s privileged position.

While the future of Russian bases, the US-backed Syrian Democratic Forces in northeast Syria, interim governance, counter-terror activities, and Syria’s new role in the region may take months to take shape, it is clear today that Syria will be ruled by an opposition coalition with the support of a majority of Syrians.


 Several analytic toplines stand out at this early stage.

First, Assad’s hold on power was far more tenuous than was broadly perceived internationally, especially by those counseling reconciliation and normalization.

Second, Iran and Russia have suffered a dramatic loss of influence in Syria and the region as a result of wars in the Middle East and Ukraine, making it impossible for them to save Assad in 2024 as they did in 2014-15.

Third, Turkey is the only country that seems to have had a winning strategy for Syria: opposing Assad while negotiating with his backers, hosting refugees, supporting the opposition politically and militarily, and combating the People’s Defense Units (YPG), an offshoot of the anti-Turkey terror group Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK), in northern Syria.

Ankara now has unrivaled economic, diplomatic, and military leverage over the stabilization and rebuilding process, and the goodwill of an overwhelming number of Syrians.

Fourth, the US approach to Syria for the past decade—tolerating Assad and his Iranian patrons, hyper-focusing on the Islamic State, providing humanitarian assistance but ceasing political and military aid to the opposition, giving open-ended support to the YPG/PKK—has collapsed.

Washington, and Jerusalem, will have to come up with a coherent and constructive approach to the new management in Damascus.


 — Rich Outzen is a geopolitical consultant and nonresident senior fellow at the Atlantic Council Turkey Program with thirty-two years of government service both in uniform and as a civilian.


 
 Assad’s fall is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity for the region 
 The Assad regime, which has ruled Syria since 1971, was deeply authoritarian, a key part of Iran’s regional influence and the destabilization of the region, and the author of countless human rights abuses.

Its collapse presents both challenges and opportunities for Syria, the region, and the international community.


 Syria 
 The fall of the Assad regime could pave the way for political reform, democratization, and the rebuilding of a war-torn nation.

With Assad gone without resistance, there is an opportunity to create an inclusive government that represents Syria’s ethnically and religiously diverse population, fosters economic recovery, and allows refugees and internally displaced persons to return.

The Biden administration should work with international partners to support a transition to such a government, and ensure that all stakeholders, including opposition groups, civil society, and minority communities, have a voice in shaping Syria’s future.

The Biden administration should also prioritize immediate stabilization and humanitarian funding to rebuild infrastructure, provide healthcare, and support the momentum for a quick return of refugees and displaced persons.

The resumption of the United Nations (UN)-led Damascus-based humanitarian response across Syria to prevent the situation morphing into chaos is also an important step to support.


 While engaging with Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham (HTS), a US- and UN-designated terrorist organization, will present its challenges, the designation presents important leverage for the United States and international partners.

The Trump administration, through dialogue with Turkey, could use that leverage to ensure HTS walks the walk as an acceptable actor within the Syrian scene and affirm it is no longer threatening US or regional security.

The next US administration, working through international organizations, should also focus on fostering economic recovery and preventing the re-emergence of extremist groups.


 The region 
 Assad’s fall completely disrupts the influence of Iran and Hezbollah, which have heavily supported and depended on the Assad regime.

It will also decrease sectarian tensions fueled by the regime’s survival, reducing the risk of regional spillover conflicts.

The United States should use this opportunity to coordinate a more firm regional policy toward Iran’s malign activities.

Moreover, a power vacuum in Syria could lead to regional instability and risk Syria becoming a field for regional competition over hegemony, potentially creating more chaos and empowering extremist groups if not appropriately managed.


 A stable, post-Assad Syria could catalyze peace and cooperation among neighboring states, but that requires serious diplomatic engagement from the United States with the region.

To that end, the United States should engage in multilateral diplomacy with Turkey and Qatar and mediate responses with key regional stakeholders, including Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Israel, and Jordan, to ensure a coordinated approach to Syria’s stabilization.

Encouraging dialogue between adversarial states could also help reduce tensions and foster cooperative security arrangements.


 The United States 
 For the United States, Assad’s collapse helps counter terrorism, curb Iranian influence, and promote stability in the Middle East.

The fall of Assad will end his regime’s policy of sponsoring terrorism, which lasted for decades.

It will weaken alliances between Iranian proxies and diminish the power of Russia in the region.

However, it also poses the risk of prolonged instability, requiring the United States to engage diplomatically in shaping the outcome.

US sanctions could be a helpful tool if sanctions removal could be linked with concrete progress toward a stable and inclusive governance model that contributes to the region’s stability.


 The fall of the Assad regime presents an opportunity to address longstanding issues in Syria and the region.

However, it is not a panacea and could lead to further instability if not carefully managed.

The Biden and Trump administrations must adopt a balanced and strategic approach, focusing on inclusive governance, humanitarian support, and regional stability.

An opportunity of the kind that now presents itself in Syria comes only once.


 — Qutaiba Idlbi is a senior fellow with the Atlantic Council’s Rafik Hariri Center and Middle East Programs where he leads the Council’s work on Syria.


 
 A moment for Israel and Gulf states to reshape the region’s future rather than react to it 
 The overthrow of the Syrian regime was so long coming and yet, shockingly, so rapidly achieved.

The fall of Assad provides immediate closure on his rule in Syria, even as his horrific brutality will continue to echo for decades.

But the sudden end of the Assad era leaves open the question of what comes next—with significant reasons for caution and concern that there could be fragmentation and chaos in the country.

But no matter what follows in Syria, the implications of Assad’s departure will reverberate throughout the region.


 For Israel, the overthrow of the regime is almost certain to be seen with mixed emotions, as the Israelis are uncertain if the devil they know will ultimately be replaced by a new devil they won’t.

But there is opportunity, as well.

Israel is unlikely to take a public victory lap but is entitled to one.

The reality is that it was Israeli strikes in Lebanon over the last few months against a wide range of Hezbollah officials and weapons caches, and strikes in Syria preventing resupply to Hezbollah, that weakened the group to the point that Syrian opposition forces felt confident they could take advantage and try to capture Aleppo.

Doing so required opposition forces to be confident that there wouldn’t be (sufficient) reinforcements to the Assad regime from Hezbollah, as had been a key issue in the past.


 While Israel may not have intended or planned for the Syrian opposition to take advantage and use this development to overthrow the regime, Israel would be wise to immediately leverage it as a point of commonality and use it to seek out a quiet, private engagement with emerging leaders.

If Israel wants to better ensure its security in the north, it should reach private, serious agreements with a new Syrian government that the country won’t be used to transfer weapons to Hezbollah to rebuild the group.

Having a Lebanon that is in line with the Taif agreement and not dominated by Hezbollah, and a Syria not allied with Iran, would better ensure Israel’s long-term peace and security than any amount of interdiction or other strikes could.


 Gulf states—some of which had assumed the Assad regime was here to stay and re-welcomed him and Syria into the Arab League—are likely to have mixed reactions about his fall and the next steps they should take.

While Doha might be more inclined to provide financial resources for whatever government emerges in Damascus, long-standing concerns by Abu Dhabi and Riyadh over Islamist-led governments, combined with a reluctance simply to give away free money, as opposed to investing in countries, may cause them both to wait to see what leadership actually emerges in Syria.


 It’s too early to know if the overthrow of the Assad regime will bring greater prosperity to the Syrian people and security to the region—ultimately the Syrian people will determine their future governance.

But moments like this are rare and all too fleeting.

If Israel, Gulf states, and other regional actors are wise, they’ll take this moment as an opportunity to try to shape the region’s future and not just react to it.


 — Jonathan Panikoff is the director of the Atlantic Council’s Scowcroft Middle East Security Initiative and a former deputy national intelligence officer for the Near East at the US National Intelligence Council.


 
 Assad should still be held accountable under international law.

Here’s how.


 Syrians have worked thirteen long years to take down their dictator—and an even longer fifty-plus years if you count the whole of the now defunct Assad dynasty.

The international community must center Syrians in this moment, respect their aspirations for their country, and support them in achieving the pluralistic vision of a free, democratic Syria that so many fought for with their lives and livelihoods.


 Even before the shock of Assad’s overthrow has worn off, Syrians who have spent more than a decade working on political processes, justice initiatives, and social change are swinging into action to realize the goals of their hard-won revolution.


 On the justice front, the international community, global institutions, and national courts can take immediate action to support Syrians.


 First, the chief prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC) can hold Assad and his former officials to account by swiftly opening a preliminary examination into transboundary crimes in the Syrian conflict.

The ICC’s mandate in the matter would be limited to crimes against humanity of deportation, persecution, and other inhumane acts committed against Syrian civilians who fled to Jordan, an ICC member state.

However, initiating a preliminary examination into these crimes would send a strong signal that the ICC is fit for purpose and that Assad will not continue to enjoy impunity for some of the worst crimes committed in this century.

And ICC member states can support this push by making their own referrals to the court, similar to their referrals on Ukraine , Palestine and Afghanistan .

In tandem, efforts should be made to encourage any interim government in Syria to accept the jurisdiction of the court, similar to how Ukraine did in 2014 , with a path to eventual ICC membership once a proper governance structure is established and laws passed.


 Second, France can proceed with its Assad case.

In June a French appeals court upheld an arrest warrant against Assad, then a sitting head of state, for chemical weapons attacks against Syria’s civilian population.

This was precedent setting, due to questions around Assad’s head of state immunity.

With that question no longer in dispute, the proceedings should move ahead and with the option for in absentia trials in the French system—where the defendant does not have to physically appear.

This means that Assad’s reported presence in Moscow with a refusal to appear or inability to be extradited will be irrelevant to evidence being heard on this critical chapter in Syria’s conflict.

This case in France is just one of many universal jurisdiction processes that are currently done, in progress, or anticipated in national courts with the ability to prosecute alleged perpetrators in the Syrian conflict for war crimes and crimes against humanity.

All those processes must continue and be supported by outside countries, particularly as more former Assad regime officials responsible for violations may try to leave Syria in this moment.


 Lastly, there will be open questions about what will happen to the case that The Netherlands and Canada have brought against the Assad regime at the International Court of Justice (ICJ) for violations of the Convention against Torture.

Because the ICJ adjudicates disputes between states and not against individuals, Assad himself would not “stand trial” there—rather this will fall into a new twist on a gray area that other country disputes have found themselves in, such as those involving the former Yugoslavia , Myanmar , and the Taliban .

Either way, Syrian victims and survivors should be centered in these considerations and all attempts made to secure justice and redress for them.


 — Gissou Nia is the director of the Strategic Litigation Project at the Atlantic Council.

She previously worked on crimes against humanity cases before the International Criminal Court and is counsel on submissions to the ICC Office of the Prosecutor.


 
 Russia is losing its Middle Eastern power projection—and great-power claims 
 The liberation of Damascus by Syrian rebels, led by Hayat Tahrir al-Sham (HTS), which is designated by the United States as a terrorist group, reflects the increasing degradation of the multinational ground forces supporting the Assad regime.

But it also reflects a likely catastrophic loss of Russia’s significant investment in the Assad regime and Russia’s foothold in the Mediterranean.


 The collapse of the Assad regime represents a contraction of Russia’s ability to project power in the region—and thus its claim of being a great power.

Russia may now face losing a warm-water naval base as well as an air base.

The damage to Moscow’s ability to maneuver in Africa and the Mediterranean may have a strategic impact on Russian influence across the world.


 — R.

Clarke Cooper is a nonresident senior fellow with the Atlantic Council’s Scowcroft Middle East Security Initiative and is the founder and president of Guard Hill House, LLC.

He previously served as assistant secretary for political-military affairs at the US Department of State.


 
 Assad’s fall may not be a total loss for Putin 
 The fall of Syria’s Assad regime, which Moscow had backed for so many years, is a severe blow to Russian influence in the Middle East.

There is, however, one silver lining in it for Moscow: the fall of the pro-Russian Assad regime will not lead to its replacement by a pro-Western regime, as occurred in the “color revolutions” of earlier years.

Russian President Vladimir Putin’s ongoing good relations with other Arab governments—including Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Qatar, and Egypt—are also likely to remain strong.


 The real question now is whether Russia will be able to keep its naval and air base in Syria.

The anti-Assad forces that have just prevailed may not be inclined to let them stay—especially since Russian warplanes based in Syria had repeatedly bombed them right up until recently.

If, however, a power struggle now ensues among the victors in Syria, this may provide Moscow with an opportunity to work with some against others.

One possibility is Russian support for an Alawite statelet along the Mediterranean coast where its two bases are located (the Alawite minority was the backbone of the Assad regime).

Moscow can even cite US support for the Syrian Kurdish statelet in northeastern Syria as setting a precedent for Russia doing something similar for the Alawites.


 Still, Moscow retaining its naval and air base may not be possible, either because a new Sunni-dominated Syrian government proves to be strong and expels the Russians or because Syria descends into such chaos that the safety of the bases cannot be maintained.


 — Mark N.

Katz is a nonresident senior fellow with the Atlantic Council’s Middle East Programs and professor emeritus of government and politics at the George Mason University Schar School of Policy and Government.


 
 With its proxies crumbling, Iran will rethink its security strategy 
 The fall of Assad is another nail in the coffin of Iran’s Axis of Resistance, which will prompt Tehran to reconsider its security strategy.


 In a matter of weeks, Iran lost its pillars in the Axis of Resistance.

After the heavy blow that Hezbollah suffered at the hands of Israel, the fall of Assad is a fatal strike on Iran’s influence efforts in the Middle East.



</CONTENT>
