<TITLE>2024: A year in the Middle East</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2024-12-19</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/blogs/menasource/2024-a-year-in-the-middle-east/</URL>
<AUTHOR>yrashed</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
2024 was a tumultuous year in the Middle East.
-  Israel's war with Hamas, including the assassination of Hamas Deputy Leader Saleh Al-Arouri,  led to escalating tensions with Hezbollah and raised fears of wider regional conflict.
-  Iran faced a deadly ISIS-K bombing in Kerman, and the US carried out strikes against Houthi targets in Yemen.
-  Political instability also marked the year, with elections in several countries and the rapid toppling of the Assad regime in Syria.
-  These events highlight the complex and interconnected crises impacting the region, including economic, military, and human costs.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- “No public statements emerged from the White House or the US Department of State,” noted retired Ambassador Richard Le Baron, reflecting on the role of the United States in light of its past interventions in the Middle East.
- “This is not a fight the United States will pick.
- The reasons for this reticence could range from a simple lack of bandwidth to deal with what is considered a relatively minor matter in the Middle East to a more serious weighing of current priorities.”   May 19: Iranian President Ebrahim Raisi killed in helicopter crash   In May, an Iranian Air Force helicopter crashed in Azerbaijan, killing eight, including Ebrahim Raisi, Iran’s president and his minister of foreign affairs.

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
December 19, 2024 
 
 
 Leila Ouhri, Kate Springs, and Yaseen Rashed 
 
 2024 was a year of consequence for the Middle East and North Africa, with metastasizing conflict, human tragedies, and major geopolitical shifts.

The war in Gaza ground on, with Israel taking out much of Hamas’s leadership but with significant economic, military, and human costs.

Tehran’s ballistic missile attack on Israel in early October, the latter’s retaliation against Iranian military infrastructure, and Israel’s invasion of Southern Lebanon and attacks on Hezbollah targets raised concerns that the Middle East was teetering on the brink of a devastating wider regional war.


 Political change was also afoot, between Libya’s rising instability and elections taking place in all of Algeria, Syria, Iran, Jordan, Kuwait, and Syria, and the year concluding in a lightning-fast offensive leading to the toppling of the Assad regime.


 Catch up on the year’s biggest moments.


 January 2: Israel assassinates Hamas’s Deputy Leader Saleh Al-Arouri in Beirut 
 As the war between Israel and Hamas continued into 2024, Israel began the year with a decisive victory: The assassination of Hamas Deputy Leader Saleh Al-Arouri, one of the linchpins of the October 7 attack, in Beirut.

The attack further inflamed tensions between Israel and Hezbollah—the Iranian proxy group operating in Lebanon—amid escalating violence between the two since October 7.


 Though Hezbollah leader Hassan Nasrallah vowed retribution against Israel, he is “notorious for having a much noisier bark than bite; just how loudly he will allow Hezbollah’s guns to roar over Arouri remains in question,” writes David Daoud, a senior fellow at Foundation for Defense of Democracies.

Despite diplomatic attempts to establish a ceasefire, tensions would continue to escalate throughout the year, culminating in an Israeli invasion of Southern Lebanon in October.


 
 
 
 
 
 January 3: Bombing in Kerman, Iran by ISIS-K kills 95 
 On January 3, Iran saw the deadliest terror attack on its soil since the 1979 Islamic Revolution, as a bombing in the city of Kerman killed nearly a hundred citizens.

The attack was claimed by the Islamic State of Iraq and al-Sham (ISIS) shortly after the bombings.

Iranian officials, however, were quick to shift the blame to Western countries, including the United States and Israel.


 Blaming Iran’s Western opponents for the terror attack was a clear conscious decision by Iran, writes Jason Brodsky, policy director of United Against Nuclear Iran (UANI).

“It seeks to capitalize on the slaughter to score propaganda points against the US and Israeli governments at a time when both are under international criticism for the Gaza war.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 January 11 – 12: US-led strikes against the Houthis 
 On January 11, the US military, backed by international partners, conducted limited strikes against Houthi targets in Yemen, including missile and drone storage sites, production facilities, and launch platforms.

The strikes, which represented the first offensive airstrikes by the global coalition formed to protect shipping in the Red Sea, came after months of Houthi attacks on ships headed towards or from Israel, as the Houthis have pledged solidarity to Hamas since the outbreak of the Gaza War.


 The goal of the strikes, writes Kirsten Fontenrose, a nonresident senior fellow at the Scowcroft Middle East Security Initiative, was to “reduce the group’s ability to destabilize the region, threaten global shipping, endanger Israel and surrounding countries with poorly planned strikes, and protect civilians on land and at sea.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 January 28-29: Mattei Plan unveiled at the Italy-Africa Summit 
 At a summit with African and European leaders in late January, Italian Prime Minister Giorgia Meloni unveiled the Mattei Plan—a vision for newfound political and economic relations between Italy and African countries.

In her remarks, Prime Minister Meloni focused on the potential economic opportunities between Italy and North Africa, focusing on energy production and job creation in the continent, to stem migratory flows to Europe and curb North Africa’s reliance on Russian energy.


 The Mattei Plan, however, represents not only an economic opportunity but also a political one, writes Karim Mezran, director of the Atlantic Council’s North Africa Initiative, as Maghreb countries have been particularly affected by great power competition and moved in recent years towards rival blocs.

The Mattei Plan, as an engine for Italian diplomacy towards North Africa, represents a “political intuition to move away from today’s stagnant international cooperation policies and toward new dynamics that could produce extraordinary results if carefully implemented.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 February 9: Israeli President Netanyahu announces planned Rafah invasion 
 On February 9, Israeli President Benjamin Netanyahu announced a planned ground offensive in Rafah to defeat remaining Hamas strongholds in the south of the Gaza Strip, raising alarm bells both on the international stage and inside the Egyptian government.

Egyptian President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, who opposes a mass influx of Palestinians to Sinai, repeatedly stressed his objections to resettling Palestinian refugees in Egypt, even with the worsening humanitarian crisis in Gaza.


 As the war between Israel and Hamas has raged, the conflict in Gaza has put the Egyptian government and Sisi himself “between a rock and a hard place,” writes Shahira Amin, a nonresident fellow with the Scowcroft Middle East Security Initiative.

Regardless of his decision to allow refugees through the Rafah crossing or not, “the Egyptian president will not emerge as a winner,” as he risks being accused of either complicity in ethnic cleansing or complicity in the deaths of civilians trapped in the Gaza Strip.


 
 
 
 
 
 February 14: Turkish President Erdoğan visits Egypt 
 Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan visited Egypt on February 14 for the first time in over a decade, marking a milestone in diplomatic relations between the two countries after over ten years of enmity.

The governments in Cairo and Ankara have been diplomatically strained since Sisi’s rise to power in 2013, but have calmed in recent years as disputes between the two over Libya and Qatar have been resolved.


 “Effectively, there was nothing left to fight about,” writes Borzou Daragahi, a nonresident senior fellow with the Scowcroft Middle East Security Initiative.

He predicts that the relations between the two are likely to move into relative rapprochement, focused on energy, tourism, and business deals.


 
 
 
 
 
 February 24: Protests in Israel met with a violent police response 
 On the evening of February 24, thousands of protestors in Tel Aviv demanding an end to the war in Gaza and the release of hostages were met with water cannons, detentions, and violence at the hands of the Israeli security forces.

The protests, and the governmental responses, revealed a deep division within Israeli society, as many in the country see the far-right government led by Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu as prolonging the war in Gaza for political survival.


 As various ceasefire proposals have been put forth, the issue of “Netanyahu and his government’s responsibility for the security breach that allowed October 7 to happen is of utmost importance,” writes Ksenia Svetlova, a nonresident senior fellow with the Atlantic Council’s Middle East Programs.

Today, when Israel is at a crossroads regarding the possibility of a Palestinian state and normalization with Arab neighbors, “this issue is more crucial than ever before.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 March 8: On International Women’s Day, three women from the Middle East are recognized 
 On International Women’s Day 2024, three women from the Middle East were featured in TIME Magazine’s annual list of the most influential women.

Nadia Murad, a Yazidi human rights activist, and Nobel Peace laureate, was recognized for her work advocating for survivors of genocide and sexual violence.

Additionally, TIME honored the work of Yael Admi, a co-founder and leader of the Israeli movement Women Wage Peace, and Reem Hajajreh, founder and director of the Palestinian organization Women of the Sun.

Despite the ongoing war in Gaza, these women have collaborated through their organizations to call for an end to the war and a sustainable resolution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.


 The three women, writes Marcy Grossman, a nonresident senior fellow with the Atlantic Council’s Middle East Programs, “serve as powerful reminders that women are more than victims of war; they are crucial architects of lasting, peaceful solutions.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 March 17: EU announces $8.1 billion aid package to Egypt 
 On March 17, the European Union announced an $8.1 billion (7.4-billion euro) aid package for Egypt to curb illegal migration to the European continent.

The aid package comes as part of broader financing to Egypt, including an $8 billion loan from the International Monetary Fund and $35 billion in investments from the Emirati sovereign wealth fund Abu Dhabi Developmental Holding Company.


 However, the financial assistance, meant to ease the economic crisis in the country and bring economic stability, may not be effective unless Sisi’s government makes significant changes to the country’s macroeconomic policy, writes Shahira Amin, a nonresident senior fellow with the Scowcroft Middle East Security Initiative.

Unless Egypt improves its social protection programs, its monetary management strategies, and human rights record, Egypt’s economy will continue to flounder, she explains.


 
 
 
 
 
 March 18: UN Fact Finding Mission on Iran presents its findings 
 On March 18, the Independent International Fact-Finding Mission on the Islamic Republic of Iran (FFMI), formed to investigate human rights abuses committed during the 2022 Women, Life, Freedom protests, presented its findings to the UN Human Rights Council.

The FFMI’s report revealed indiscriminate arbitrary detentions, violations of liberty and physical security, and widespread sexual and gender-based violence, with a veil of impunity for these abuses at the highest level of the Iranian state.


 The FFMI’s findings reveal “the Iranian state’s widespread and violent efforts to crush dissent in the country, but they only show the surface of the deep-seated political and social crisis in Iran,” write Rose Parris Richter and Azadeh Pourzand, executive director and community director of Impact Iran.

Extending the mandate of the FFMI, they argue, represents “not just a strategic necessity but a moral imperative” to truly reveal the extent of these crimes and pursue accountability and justice.


 
 
 
 
 
 March 18: KDP announces boycott of 2024 Kurdistan elections 
 The political tensions between the Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP) and the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK) came to a head on March 18, with the KDP’s announcement that it would boycott the June 2024 elections.

This decision comes after the Federal Supreme Court annulled a KDP-sponsored electoral law, which increased minority-quota seats that historically favored the KDP.


 “Despite their flaws, elections have been a source of legitimacy for the KDP and PUK to resolve differences peacefully,” writes Sarkawt Shamsulddin, a nonresident fellow with the Atlantic Council’s Iraq Initiative.

The longer elections are delayed, the higher the risk that instability in the Kurdistan Region of Iraq will spill over to the rest of the country, as both parties are influential partners in forming the Iraqi government.


 
 
 
 
 
 April 1: Israeli strike kills seven aid workers in Gaza 
 On April 1, an Israel Defense Forces (IDF) strike in Gaza killed seven members of an aid convoy run by the World Central Kitchen, a humanitarian organization operating in Gaza to deliver material assistance to civilians affected by the conflict.

The deaths of the aid workers, which caused global outrage and condemnation from governments worldwide, revealed the difficulty of delivering aid in the Gaza Strip—both because of the massive scale of the needs and the physical risks of injury or death to aid workers.


 Arwa Damon, a nonresident senior fellow at the Atlantic Council’s Rafik Hariri Center for the Middle East and president of the International Network for Aid, Relief, and Assistance (INARA), writes that the deaths of the World Central Kitchen members revealed the strategic issues with the process of deconfliction.

“It’s a process that has never really worked in this wretched battlespace.” As any movement is fraught with dangers, it is often aid workers who are caught in the middle.


 
 
 
 
 
 April 14: Iran attacks Israel with over 300 drones and missiles 
 On April 14, in response to the killing of Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps (IRGC) commander Mohammad Reza Zahedi at the Iranian embassy in Syria on April 1, Iran attacked Israel in a massive and unprecedented drone and missile barrage, representing the most dangerous escalation between the two countries in decades and the first direct attack on Israel by Iran.


 The missile strikes marked a shift from Iran’s traditional strategy towards Israel, which has historically focused on attacks through proxy groups funded by the IRGC, rather than direct military confrontation, writes Raz Zimmt, senior researcher at the Institute for National Security Studies.

While Israel’s measured response to the strikes allowed the two countries to put the current round of conflict to an end, the escalation “highlights the high potential for miscalculation in the lack of direct communication channels, [which] will get even more serious if Iran decides to abandon its status as a nuclear-threshold state and turns its policy toward attaining nuclear weapons.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 April 16: United Nations Special Envoy for Libya resigns 
 On April 16, the head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), Abdullah Batili, resigned, demonstrating the failure of international efforts to resolve the electoral crisis in Tripoli, as political and military leaders have fought for political power in the country.

In an interview with Tahani Elmogrbi, Emad al-Sayah, the High National Election Commission chairman, spoke on the current political climate and elections in the current environment after Batili’s resignation.


 “The central issue in the Libyan crisis is the political dimension, which serves as its primary source and cannot be disregarded…Currently, there is a trend of leveraging foreign interests and ambitions to maintain power, which hinders progress toward resolving the crisis.

Continuing with this approach, in the absence of unified and conscientious political leadership, will exacerbate political conflicts and deepen internal divisions,” explained al-Sayah.


 
 
 
 
 
 April 28-29: Saudi Arabia releases midway annual report on Vision 2030 
 On April 28th and 29th, the World Economic Forum held a special meeting on global collaboration, growth, and energy for development in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

The event came only days after Saudi Arabia released its midway annual report on Vision 2030—the Kingdom’s agenda for economic, political, and social reform, with a special emphasis on women’s inclusion in the workforce.


 The report found that there has been substantial progress regarding women’s economic inclusion, in large part due to the advancements made in women’s financial literacy and knowledge.

“Since the launch of Vision 2030, economic developments have pushed women to be more independent and in control of their finances,” writes Hanaa Almoaibed, a nonresident senior fellow at the WIn fellowship.

“Reforms to social welfare created more pathways out of poverty by replacing blanket subsidies with targeted support and new policies related to social insurance, social assistance, and the labor market.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 May 10: Kuwaiti Emir suspends Parliament 
 On May 10, Emir Sheikh Mishal al-Ahmed al-Sabah suspended Kuwait’s parliament, the latest move in a long-standing conflict between the appointed cabinet and the opposition-dominated parliament, which the emir said was obstructing Kuwait’s economic progress.

This move by Sabah did not provoke significant public outcry, yet it is part of a recurring pattern of political suspensions—with no Kuwaiti parliament completing a full term since 2016.

The country’s political situation has received only a muted regional and international response.


 What about the United States’ reaction to the backsliding of democratic norms in Kuwait? “No public statements emerged from the White House or the US Department of State,” noted retired Ambassador Richard Le Baron, reflecting on the role of the United States in light of its past interventions in the Middle East.

“This is not a fight the United States will pick.

The reasons for this reticence could range from a simple lack of bandwidth to deal with what is considered a relatively minor matter in the Middle East to a more serious weighing of current priorities.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 May 19: Iranian President Ebrahim Raisi killed in helicopter crash 
 In May, an Iranian Air Force helicopter crashed in Azerbaijan, killing eight, including Ebrahim Raisi, Iran’s president and his minister of foreign affairs.

For some Iranians, Raisi’s death sparked hushed celebration.

Raisi’s death may have caused infighting within the regime in the immediate aftermath of the crash, but it did not substantially alter the policies of the Islamic Republic, as the country’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, retains tight control over the regime’s foreign policy, nuclear ambitions, and internal repression.


 “At the same time, Raisi’s death has removed a potential contender for inheriting the mantle of supreme leadership after the expected demise of eighty-five-year-old Khamenei,” wrote Khosro Sayeh Isfahani.

As per the constitution, the Assembly of Experts will fill the position, which again is tightly controlled by Khamenei.

According to Reuters, Raisi’s name was already crossed off as a contender some six months ago in light of his incompetence and sagging popularity, reconfirming warnings that “the future leader can’t be accurately predicted—that the contenders’ list is constantly shifting, and the game is far from over.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 May 25: Tunisian President announces partial government reshuffle 
 Tunisian President Kais Saied announced a partial government reshuffle on May 25, replacing two ministers and creating a new post for national security, amid a crackdown on opposition and protests.

The reshuffle is seen as an effort to suppress growing dissent, especially in the capital, Tunis, where opposition to Saied’s rule is intensifying.

Despite growing international concern, Saied’s control over Tunisia remains firm as he prepares for the upcoming presidential elections.


 “What emerges from these latest events in Tunisia is a progressive increase in President Saied’s repression of all opposition to his role and, as a consequence, further opposition to him.

The events in Tunisia are taking place in front of the international community, including Western democracies, which once again show their inability to uphold actions that they support in theory: human rights and democracy,” wrote Karim Mezran, director of the Atlantic Council’s North Africa Program, and Nicola Pedde, director of the Institute for Global Studies.


 
 
 
 
 
 June 4: Shia Afghans are being brought to Iran to make up for the lack of religious Iranians 
 This summer, over one hundred thousand Shia Afghans grieved alongside Iranians in the city of Mashdad’s processions for Ebrahim Raisi, the late Iranian president, making for a salient show of the rapidly growing Afghan presence in the Islamic Republic.

Iran, a country of around ninety-one million, now has as many as six million Afghan migrants and, if current trends persist, will have twenty million Afghan migrants years from

</CONTENT>
