<TITLE>Putin’s peace plan is actually a call for Ukraine’s capitulation</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2025-01-07</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/blogs/ukrainealert/putins-peace-plan-is-actually-a-call-for-ukraines-capitulation/</URL>
<AUTHOR>Peter Dickinson</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
This article argues that Putin's proposed peace plan for Ukraine is a thinly veiled attempt at capitulation, not a genuine path to peace.
-  The plan demands significant territorial concessions, including Ukrainian provinces currently not under Russian control, as well as Ukraine's neutrality and demilitarization.
-  Putin's actions, such as accepting Finland's NATO membership without protest, contradict his stated rationale for these demands.
-  The author contends that these conditions would leave Ukraine vulnerable and embolden Russia, potentially leading to renewed aggression in the future.
-  The article ultimately criticizes any attempts to appease Putin, emphasizing the need to hold Russia accountable for its actions.
-  The author suggests that ceding to these demands would be disastrous for Ukraine.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
-  As the world watches the Russian invasion of Ukraine unfold, UkraineAlert delivers the best Atlantic Council expert insight and analysis on Ukraine twice a week directly to your inbox.
-   Russia’s true intentions can be seen in its insistence that Ukraine abandon efforts to join NATO and accept permanent geopolitical neutrality.
- Moscow claims this is essential in order to safeguard Russian national security, but Putin’s own actions suggest otherwise.
-   When neighboring Finland announced plans to join NATO in 2022, Putin made no effort to block the process and announced that Russia had “ no problems ” with Finnish accession.
- He then went even further, withdrawing most Russian troops from the border with Finland.

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
With Donald Trump set to return to the White House in the coming weeks, speculation is mounting that Ukraine and Russia may soon begin serious peace negotiations.

However, there is very little sign that Russian President Vladimir Putin is ready to abandon his goal of subjugating Ukraine.

Instead, the peace formula currently being promoted by Kremlin officials would be more likely to pave the way for the next stage in Putin’s campaign to erase Ukrainian independence entirely.


 Ever since the abortive peace talks of spring 2022 during the initial phase of the full-scale invasion, Russia has insisted that any peace deal must include territorial concessions from Kyiv along with Ukrainian neutrality and the country’s comprehensive demilitarization.

Putin himself spelled out Russia’s territorial expectations in June 2024, demanding that Kyiv cede four partially occupied Ukrainian provinces, none of which are fully under Russian control.

This would mean handing over large amounts of unoccupied Ukrainian territory including the city of Zaporizhzhia with a population of around three quarters of a million people.


 On numerous other occasions, Putin and his Kremlin colleagues have reaffirmed their conditions.

These include Ukraine officially giving up its pursuit of NATO membership and agreeing not to enter into any military alliances with Western powers.

Kyiv is also expected to accept extensive limitations on the size of its armed forces and on the kinds of weapons systems it is allowed to possess.


 These proposals are not a recipe for a sustainable settlement.

On the contrary, Putin’s peace plan is in fact a call for Kyiv’s complete capitulation.

Moscow’s demands are deliberately designed to leave Ukraine internationally isolated and unable to defend itself.

If these terms are imposed on the Ukrainian authorities, there can be little doubt that Putin would use any subsequent pause in hostilities to rearm before renewing the war in the coming years.


 
 
 Stay updated 
 
 
 As the world watches the Russian invasion of Ukraine unfold, UkraineAlert delivers the best Atlantic Council expert insight and analysis on Ukraine twice a week directly to your inbox.


 Russia’s true intentions can be seen in its insistence that Ukraine abandon efforts to join NATO and accept permanent geopolitical neutrality.

Moscow claims this is essential in order to safeguard Russian national security, but Putin’s own actions suggest otherwise.


 When neighboring Finland announced plans to join NATO in 2022, Putin made no effort to block the process and announced that Russia had “ no problems ” with Finnish accession.

He then went even further, withdrawing most Russian troops from the border with Finland.

Clearly, Putin does not view NATO as a security threat to Russia itself.

Instead, he sees the alliance as a potential obstacle to his own expansionist ambitions in Ukraine.


 Russian demands for a neutral and demilitarized Ukraine should be equally unacceptable in Kyiv and among Ukraine’s Western partners.

Agreeing to the Kremlin’s conditions would mean leaving millions of Ukrainians at Putin’s mercy, while also emboldening Moscow and inviting more Russian aggression.

From Chechnya and Georgia to Crimea and Syria, there is ample evidence from the past two decades that each successive failure to hold Russia accountable only encourages fresh escalations.


 The West’s misguided efforts to appease Putin have already led to the largest and bloodiest European war since World War II.

Any further attempts at appeasement will have similarly disastrous consequences for the future stability and security of Europe.

Indeed, senior European officials are now warning that a military confrontation with Moscow is becoming more likely, with German spy chief Bruno Kahl recently predicting that Russia may seek to test NATO before the end of the current decade.


 
 
 Eurasia Center events 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 While Russia is pushing for a disarmed and neutral Ukraine, Ukrainian officials are preparing for possible peace talks by prioritizing the need for credible security guarantees.

In recent months, Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy has signaled the country’s readiness to temporarily compromise on territorial integrity in order to move forward toward a viable peace.

At the same time, officials in Kyiv have underlined that there is no room for any similar compromises on the issue of security guarantees.


 Ukraine’s objective remains NATO membership, which is seen in Kyiv as the only credible long-term guarantee of the country’s security and sovereignty.

However, key members of the alliance including the United States and Germany remain deeply reluctant to embrace Ukraine’s NATO aspirations.


 With their country’s pathway to NATO accession likely to be extremely politically challenging, Ukrainian officials are also exploring the possibility of bilateral security guarantees.

In a recent interview with US podcaster Lex Fridman, Zelenskyy said security guarantees for Kyiv to end Russia’s war would only be effective if the United States provides them.

He was also scathing of the 1994 Budapest Memorandum, which saw Ukraine surrender the world’s third-largest nuclear arsenal in exchange for security assurances from Russia, the US, and the UK that ultimately proved worthless.


 Given the diametrically opposed positions of Russia and Ukraine on the issue of NATO membership, it seems certain that security guarantees will be the most problematic point during any forthcoming negotiations to end the war.

Can Western leaders come up with a credible security formula that will safeguard Ukrainian statehood and deter further Russian aggression? Unless they do so, Ukraine’s prospects will be grim and the rest of Europe will face years of costly confrontation with a resurgent Russia.


 Serhii Kuzan is Chairman of the Ukrainian Security and Cooperation Center (USCC).

He formerly served as an adviser to the Ukrainian Ministry of Defense (2022-2023) and as an advisor to the Secretary of Ukraine’s National Security and Defense Council (2014).


 Further reading 
 The views expressed in UkraineAlert are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Atlantic Council, its staff, or its supporters.


 
 
 
 
 
 The Eurasia Center’s mission is to enhance transatlantic cooperation in promoting stability, democratic values and prosperity in Eurasia, from Eastern Europe and Turkey in the West to the Caucasus, Russia and Central Asia in the East.


 
 
 
 Follow us on social media and support our work 
 
 
 Image: People walk at the site of a Russian missile strike, amid Russia's attack on Ukraine, in central Kyiv, Ukraine, December 20, 2024.

(REUTERS/Valentyn Ogirenko)

</CONTENT>
