<TITLE>Introducing WP Ventures</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2024-12-20</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.washingtonpost.com/pr/2024/12/20/introducing-wp-ventures/</URL>
<AUTHOR>WashPostPR</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
The Washington Post is launching WP Ventures, a new initiative focused on growing its reach, revenue, and relevance in a changing media landscape.
-  Led by Managing Editor Krissah Thompson, the team will expand social media presence, create new commercial opportunities in consumer and lifestyle journalism, and accelerate innovation.
-  Thompson, with extensive experience at The Post, will be the Editor of WP Ventures, and will be partnered with General Manager Samantha Henig, who brings significant experience building journalism products.
-  Henig's background includes roles at The New York Times, BuzzFeed, and a stint in the ice cream industry.
-  The new venture will be based in Washington D.C.
- and will include teams from Video, Audio, Newsletters, and more.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- The Post has a history of innovation in digital storytelling and prior successes on platforms like TikTok and Instagram, and we are building on the greatest off-platform reach in our history, bolstered by the strength of our journalists’ platforms.
- But the need to move faster to reach untapped audiences and innovate is urgent, given the broad, and rapid, industry shifts in reader habits and economics.
- I’m delighted that Krissah, who has demonstrated exceptional leadership and talent, will serve as Editor of WP Ventures.
- Krissah is creative, steadfast and dynamic, with the right experience and outlook to lead us in pushing the boundaries in journalism and innovation.
- She has earned the trust of our newsroom and will continue to foster the kind of collaboration across Ventures, the newsroom and the rest of the company that is necessary for this new effort to succeed.

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
An announcement from Executive Editor Matt Murray: Dear All, Over the last few months, colleagues from the newsroom, opinion and business teams have focused on creating and developing a plan for WP Ventures, formerly known as the “Third Newsroom.” The goal is to explore how The Washington Post can effectively grow our reach, revenue and relevance with new audiences in a rapidly changing media landscape.

A particular focus has been expanding our presence on social media and creating new commercial opportunities for consumer and lifestyle journalism, while accelerating innovation and cross-company collaboration.

Steered by Managing Editor Krissah Thompson, this team has gathered ideas from many of you in shaping the strategy, structure and business plan for WP Ventures and the next chapter of growth at The Post.

The Post has a history of innovation in digital storytelling and prior successes on platforms like TikTok and Instagram, and we are building on the greatest off-platform reach in our history, bolstered by the strength of our journalists’ platforms.

But the need to move faster to reach untapped audiences and innovate is urgent, given the broad, and rapid, industry shifts in reader habits and economics.

I’m delighted that Krissah, who has demonstrated exceptional leadership and talent, will serve as Editor of WP Ventures.

Krissah is creative, steadfast and dynamic, with the right experience and outlook to lead us in pushing the boundaries in journalism and innovation.

She has earned the trust of our newsroom and will continue to foster the kind of collaboration across Ventures, the newsroom and the rest of the company that is necessary for this new effort to succeed.

Krissah, who reports to me, has been at The Post for more than two decades, with roles including reporter, Style assignment editor and Managing Editor.

She has covered topics ranging from immigration to voting, civil rights and race and the East Wing of the White House while leading the cultivation of and investments in our Audio team, the Style section and the Climate desk.

A core goal of WP Ventures is to strengthen our business by increasing the profitability of our more consumer-oriented coverage and building new products and experiences that drive habit and are worth paying for.

To that end, Krissah will be partnered with a General Manager to build the strategy and business case for Ventures projects.

For that role, I'm pleased to announce the hire of Samantha Henig, who has been working closely with Krissah on the planning team.

Sam brings more than 15 years of expertise in building journalism products and engaging younger, more diverse audiences.

Sam is innovative, experienced and deeply thoughtful about the ways journalism continues to evolve.

As co-founder of The New York Times’ award-winning audio division and a creator of The Daily, she has a proven track record of groundbreaking success.

Her previous leadership roles include digital editor of The New York Times Magazine and various editorial positions across The Times’s Styles, Real Estate, Home, and Travel sections.

She also held strategic leadership roles at BuzzFeed and, in a brief departure from media, worked as chief operating officer of an ice cream company.

Because this role spans editorial and commercial strategy, Sam will co-report to me and to Suzi Watford.

In the New Year, WP Ventures will set up its headquarters on the fourth floor of the D.C.

office to create a new kind of working space enabling experimentation, learning, and adaptation as we explore opportunities and new formats, in alignment with our values and journalistic standards.

The founding teams moving to Ventures include Video, Audio, Newsletters, Special Initiatives, Well+Being and Inspired Life.

In early January, we will share more details about the initial plans, though amid ongoing transformation in the industry and our company, our plans will no doubt continue to evolve as we learn and experiment.

This is an exciting moment for The Washington Post.

WP Ventures is a new kind of effort, and in Krissah and Sam, we are lucky to have strong, bold leaders.

Thanks are due to both and to all who have worked to get WP Ventures up and running.

In the New Year you will hear more from the team on a regular basis, as well as new ways to collaborate and contribute.

Please join me in congratulating Krissah and Sam as they take on these important new roles.

</CONTENT>
