<TITLE>Who are the key players in the Syrian war?</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2024-12-02</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2024/12/02/syria-war-rebels-hts-assad-key-figures/?itid=lk_inline_manual_1</URL>
<AUTHOR>Leo Sands</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
The Syrian civil war has seen a recent resurgence of rebel activity, culminating in the ousting of President Bashar al-Assad.
-  Key rebel group Hayat Tahrir al-Sham (HTS), formerly linked to al-Qaeda, led the assault, having consolidated power in northwestern Syria and now controlling the Bab al-Hawa border crossing.
-  Assad's government forces, supported by Russia and Iran, had previously held the upper hand, but recently lost significant territory, including Aleppo.
-  The article highlights the complex, shifting alliances and motivations of the various factions involved, emphasizing the uncertain future for Syria.
-  The article also notes HTS's recent efforts to portray a less extremist image and its provision of services to civilians in its controlled areas.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- Here’s what to know about the key players involved in the fighting.
- Hayat Tahrir al-Sham Return to menu HTS led the assault against government forces that ultimately forced Assad from power, more than a decade after it gained notoriety at the beginning of the Syrian civil war as a forbidding challenger to the Assad regime.
- The group’s stated aim is to establish Islamic rule in Syria, and it is the successor to onetime al-Qaeda affiliate Jabhat al-Nusra.
- In recent years, HTS has used its dominance in northwestern Syria — where it had been contained by government forces — to rebuild the constellation of remaining opposition forces into fighting forces.
- HTS has also been working to soften its image.

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
President Bashar al-Assad’s nearly quarter-century rule over Syria crumbled on Sunday, after rebels advanced into the capital, Damascus, in the culmination of an assault that lasted less than two weeks.

The rebel groups that toppled Assad after 13 years of civil war are a complex patchwork of fighters, focused on battling against different enemies — including, sometimes, each other — backed at times by foreign powers.

In November, Islamist rebel group Hayat Tahrir al-Sham (HTS) led the assault that ended up ousting Assad.

The success does not mark just a new and uncertain chapter in Syria’s history.

Its impacts will ripple beyond Syria’s borders, too.

Here’s what to know about the key players involved in the fighting.

Hayat Tahrir al-Sham Return to menu HTS led the assault against government forces that ultimately forced Assad from power, more than a decade after it gained notoriety at the beginning of the Syrian civil war as a forbidding challenger to the Assad regime.

The group’s stated aim is to establish Islamic rule in Syria, and it is the successor to onetime al-Qaeda affiliate Jabhat al-Nusra.

In recent years, HTS has used its dominance in northwestern Syria — where it had been contained by government forces — to rebuild the constellation of remaining opposition forces into fighting forces.

HTS has also been working to soften its image.

Once affiliated with al-Qaeda , it has since distanced itself from its extremist roots, focusing instead on its provision of government services to millions of people in Idlib province through the fledgling Syrian Salvation Government, the de facto administrators of HTS-controlled territory.

In recent statements, the group said it will protect cultural and religious sites in Aleppo, including churches.

The group also controls the Bab al-Hawa border crossing into Turkey, a vital corridor for funneling humanitarian aid into rebel-held areas.

The U.S.

State Department has designated HTS as a foreign terrorist organization.

Syrian government forces Return to menu Government troops loyal to Assad had staved off attempts to topple his regime since peaceful anti-government protests first broke out in 2011.

As Assad’s forces cracked down violently, the protests morphed into a full-blown rebellion, forming the contours of the current conflict.

By 2020, government troops — backed by Iran, Russia and the Lebanese militant group Hezbollah — had contained opposition rebels into a corner of northwestern Syria.

Russia has effectively acted as Assad’s air force since 2015 .

In late November, government forces suddenly appeared to have lost their upper hand, with the rebels wresting control of much of Aleppo, the major Syrian city that Assad’s troops retook in 2016, ending a four-year stalemate between Assad and HTS factions in Idlib province.

In just eight days , rebels gained control of Aleppo, Hama, Homs and Damascus — major Syrian cities that had been controlled by government forces for years.

Syrian National Army Return to menu The Syrian National Army (SNA) is a loosely knit coalition of Turkish-backed forces that has also taken part in the latest fighting, primarily against Kurdish fighters in northern Syria.

The groups in the past have also battled Assad’s government and Islamic State militants, as well as HTS and its predecessor organization.

Based in northern Syria along swaths of the shared border with Turkey, the SNA’s factions are largely composed of Syrian Arab fighters, including those who belonged to the uprising’s first rebel group, the Free Syrian Army.

Turkey’s state-run Anadolu Agency reported that the SNA participated in the recent rebel offensive, claiming to have captured a military airport in Aleppo.

The Turkish proxy force has also fought against U.S.-allied Syrian Kurdish fighters , whom Turkey considers to be terrorists because of their links to Turkey’s Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK), a militant group that has launched attacks inside Turkey in the name of Kurdish nationalism.

In the past, U.N.

experts have accused SNA fighters of widespread abuses , including summary executions, beatings, kidnappings and looting in areas under Turkey’s control.

Kurdish forces Return to menu The Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF) is an amalgam of Kurdish-led militant groups centered in northeastern Syria, supported by the United States for battling the Islamic State.

Then-President Donald Trump pulled U.S.

forces out of northern Syria in 2019, paving the way for Turkey to launch an invasion .

In addition to the SDF’s battles against Islamist extremists, it has been fighting a parallel conflict against Turkey and Turkish-backed fighters.

Turkey opposes the SDF because of its links to the PKK and has long viewed its presence near the Turkish border as a threat.

Kurdish rebel groups are not allied with those leading the offensive that toppled Assad.

Amid the latest assault, the SDF said it has battled to hold back advancing Turkish-backed fighters who participated in the HTS-led assault, before evacuating Kurdish fighters and civilians from Aleppo.

On Sunday, the SDF said its forces were engaged in “intense clashes” with Turkish-backed forces in Manbij, some of whom it said had advanced into the northern city.

Analysts say the timing of the offensive has coincided more broadly with the weakening of the Assad regime’s backers.

“This has to do with geopolitics and local opportunity,” said Emile Hokayem, senior fellow for Middle East security at the International Institute for Strategic Studies.

“The rebellion at large had regrouped, rearmed and retrained for something like this.” Kareem Fahim contributed to this report.

Middle East conflict The Israel-Gaza war has gone on for over a year , and tensions have spilled into the surrounding Middle East region .

The war: On Oct.

7, Hamas militants launched an unprecedented cross-border attack on Israel, killing about 1,200 people and taking civilian hostages.

We’re tracking how many hostages remain in Gaza .

Israel declared war on Hamas in response, launching a ground invasion that fueled the biggest displacement in the region since Israel’s creation in 1948 .

In July 2024, Hamas leader Ismail Haniyeh was killed in an attack Hamas has blamed on Israel.

Cease-fire: Israel and Lebanon’s Hezbollah agreed to a cease-fire deal in November 2024 , bringing a tenuous halt to more than a year of hostilities.

Here’s what to know about the deal’s terms and how it will be enforced.

Hezbollah: Hostilities between Israel and Hezbollah , a militant organization backed by Iran, have escalated over the past year, leading to an Israeli invasion of southern Lebanon .

Israel’s airstrikes into Lebanon have grown more intense and deadly , killing over 1,400 people including Hasan Nasrallah , Hezbollah’s longtime leader.

The Israel-Lebanon border has a history of violence that dates back to Israel’s founding.

Gaza crisis: In the Gaza Strip, Israel has waged one of this century’s most destructive wars , killing tens of thousands and plunging at least half of the population into “ famine-like conditions.

” For months, Israel has resisted pressure from Western allies to allow more humanitarian aid into the enclave .

U.S.

involvement: Despite tensions between Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and some U.S.

politicians , including President Biden, the United States supports Israel with weapons , funds aid packages , and has vetoed or abstained from the United Nations’ cease-fire resolutions.

</CONTENT>
