<TITLE>U.S. AIRDROPS FOOD AS RWANDANS START TO RETURN HOME</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2024-01-05</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.washingtonpost.com/archive/politics/1994/07/25/us-airdrops-food-as-rwandans-start-to-return-home/f57bc37f-7709-4daa-91fb-43e93d92a1b8/</URL>
<AUTHOR>Jonathan C. Randal</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
U.S.
- airdropped 17 tons of relief supplies to Rwandan refugees in Zaire (now the Democratic Republic of Congo).
-  However, relief workers criticized the airdrop as ineffective, claiming the supplies missed their target and were a wasted resource.
-  Thousands of Rwandans, primarily Hutu, began returning home after the Rwandan Patriotic Front declared victory in the civil war and promised safety.
-  The return was prompted by the urgent need to escape disease-ridden refugee camps, where a cholera epidemic was claiming many lives.
-  French health officials warned that the humanitarian crisis, compounded by the cholera outbreak, threatened another wave of deaths beyond the initial genocide.
-  The article details logistical and political disagreements surrounding the airdrop effort and the humanitarian crisis unfolding in Rwanda.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- The airdrop came as refugees streamed back into Rwanda three days after U.N.
- officials urged them to return home to escape disease-ridden camps where 1 million Rwandans have huddled since late last week.
- The Hutus, Rwanda's majority ethnic group, had fled out of fear of the Rwandan Patriotic Front, which last week declared itself victorious in the nation's civil war.
- They feared that the Front, led by the Tutsi ethnic minority, would avenge the hundreds of thousands of Tutsis slaughtered by the Hutu-led government army and government-trained militias since April.
- The Rwandan Patriotic Front, which formed a new government last week, has promised that Hutu refugees returning to Rwanda will be safe.
- At the insistence of the Rwandan Patriotic Front, foreign correspondents were driven to Ruhengeri, Rwanda, about 40 miles northeast of Goma, to witness the return trek of Hutus who had crossed the border in the past two days.

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
GOMA, ZAIRE, JULY 24 -- Three U.S.

Air Force planes airdropped 17 tons of relief supplies for Hutu refugees today as a few thousand Rwandans who had fled to Zaire to escape chaos and bloodshed in their own country began to return home.

U.S.

Defense Department officials said the planes dropped 34,000 pounds of supplies at their target, a private coffee plantation 18 miles north of refugee camps around Goma.

But some relief workers charged today that the 108-pound bundles -- which included meat, flour, biscuits and rice -- missed their mark and that the airdrops were little more than a public relations gimmick.

The airdrop came as refugees streamed back into Rwanda three days after U.N.

officials urged them to return home to escape disease-ridden camps where 1 million Rwandans have huddled since late last week.

The Hutus, Rwanda's majority ethnic group, had fled out of fear of the Rwandan Patriotic Front, which last week declared itself victorious in the nation's civil war.

They feared that the Front, led by the Tutsi ethnic minority, would avenge the hundreds of thousands of Tutsis slaughtered by the Hutu-led government army and government-trained militias since April.

The Rwandan Patriotic Front, which formed a new government last week, has promised that Hutu refugees returning to Rwanda will be safe.

At the insistence of the Rwandan Patriotic Front, foreign correspondents were driven to Ruhengeri, Rwanda, about 40 miles northeast of Goma, to witness the return trek of Hutus who had crossed the border in the past two days.

Stretched out at irregular intervals were between 1,500 and 2,000 Hutus trudging home.

In contrast to the distressed Hutu refugees still in Zaire, most of these refugees appeared to be in good spirits, occasionally smiling and waving to passing vehicles.

Faustin Nzabonima, a 30-year-old merchant from Ruhengeri, said he was walking home "because the war is over and I am afraid of catching cholera." In the dispute over the effectiveness of today's airdrop, there was some question about what the target was.

U.S.

officials said the plantation was the site from which the bundles would be distributed.

However, some aid workers said the target was actually an airport at Katale, 36 miles north of Goma.

Witnesses said one pallet of supplies landed in a cornfield a quarter of a mile from that airport.

Alison Campbell, a spokeswoman for Care International, which handles food distribution in the Katale refugee camp, said the airdrop was a "waste of time and resources of busy people in an emergency." Col.

Doug Kennett, a Defense Department spokesman, maintained that the planes delivered supplies to the plantation near the camps in Goma, as requested by the U.N.

High Commissioner for Refugees.

"We wanted to do the drop in a safe and secure area," Kennett said.

"We didn't want to crush people." Another veteran relief specialist said that at best the airdrops were of "limited use," at worst they were "ridiculous." Meanwhile, the five-day-old cholera epidemic continued its deadly pace.

French soldiers buried 2,000 bodies in the last 24 hours in and near Goma.

Officials report that the epidemic has spread into the French-controlled zone in southwest Rwanda, where hundreds of thousands of Rwandans had sought refuge before flooding into Zaire.

Philippe Douste-Blazy, France's health minister, returned from a visit to Zaire's refugee camps and warned that "after the genocide of Kalashnikov assault rifles and machetes, the Rwandan people must not fall victim to another genocide from hunger, thirst and cholera." He was referring to massacres in which extremist Hutus slaughtered hundreds of thousands of moderate Hutus and Tutsis after Rwandan President Juvenal Habyarimana, a Hutu, died in an unexplained plane crash April 6.

Douste-Blazy pleaded for the international community to insist on security guarantees for returning Hutus, who made up 85 percent of Rwanda's population.

"If the refugees do not return there will be the greatest human catastrophe of the end of the 20th century," he said.

Nzabonima, the Rwandan refugee returning to Ruhengeri, said he knew the extremist Hutu militia Interhamwe was spreading rumors that the Rwandan Patriotic Front was targeting educated Hutus, but argued that his walk home disproved those reports.

Despite the uplifted spirits of some returning refugees, there were signs that their flight had exacted a terrible physical toll.

Men carried two women aloft in a stretcher and pushed other weak refugees in wheelbarrows.

Women at the side of the road stood listless, unable to walk farther.

"Those people over there created this," said Faustin Kaliisa, a member of the Rwandan Patriotic Front's political division, speaking of the Hutu extremists who encouraged the mass exodus.

"Now we are the ones facing it, and we must face it."

</CONTENT>
