<TITLE>The growing tension within the BRICS</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2024-10-23</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2024/10/23/brics-summit-russia-china/</URL>
<AUTHOR>Ishaan Tharoor</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
The BRICS summit in Kazan, Russia, saw President Putin and other leaders emphasize the bloc's role in countering Western influence, particularly that of the U.S.
-  Russia and China view BRICS as a tool to organize non-Western states against the perceived hostility of the West, although member countries hold differing views on issues like the Ukraine war and sanctions.
-  The BRICS nations, representing nearly half the world's population, were initially conceived as an economic analysis tool, but now aim to reshape the global order in a multipolar world.
-  However, internal divisions among members, including Brazil and India, suggest the bloc is not as unified as its leaders may portray.
-  Key issues include differing political systems, geopolitical interests, and disagreements on global events.
-  Despite its growing membership, the BRICS's internal cohesion remains a challenge.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- You’re reading an excerpt from the WorldView newsletter.
- Sign up to get the rest free , including news from around the globe and interesting ideas and opinions to know, sent to your inbox on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays.
- For the hosts, the goal of the BRICS summit is clear.
- Russia, which has borne the brunt of expansive Western sanctions amid the country’s brutal invasion of Ukraine, has been eager to showcase how the embattled Kremlin is not, in fact, isolated.
- In the southern city of Kazan, Russian President Vladimir Putin welcomed delegations from the bloc’s member states of the BRICS bloc and dozens of other countries, saying Russia would champion “common values, a common vision of development and, most importantly, the principle of taking into account each other’s interests” in league with nations from the “Global South.” But earlier this year, Putin was more blunt about Russia’s stewardship of this year’s confab.

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
You’re reading an excerpt from the WorldView newsletter.

Sign up to get the rest free , including news from around the globe and interesting ideas and opinions to know, sent to your inbox on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays.

For the hosts, the goal of the BRICS summit is clear.

Russia, which has borne the brunt of expansive Western sanctions amid the country’s brutal invasion of Ukraine, has been eager to showcase how the embattled Kremlin is not, in fact, isolated.

In the southern city of Kazan, Russian President Vladimir Putin welcomed delegations from the bloc’s member states of the BRICS bloc and dozens of other countries, saying Russia would champion “common values, a common vision of development and, most importantly, the principle of taking into account each other’s interests” in league with nations from the “Global South.” But earlier this year, Putin was more blunt about Russia’s stewardship of this year’s confab.

The BRICS, he said, was engaged in an effort that would defeat the “classic colonialism” of a U.S.-led world order.

Chinese leader Xi Jinping, who also frequently touts a Beijing-coordinated alternative to Western “hegemony,” hailed his nation’s close ties to Russia as a bulwark in an uncertain age.

Both Russia and China see the BRICS as an institution that can help them organize a coalition of non-Western states to tacitly hedge against and confront a hostile West.

At last year’s summit, Xi — in a dig at perceived U.S.

bullying — said the BRICS do not “succumb to external pressure, or act as vassals of others,” nor do they believe that might makes right on the world stage.

It was a conspicuous claim, given Russia’s blatant violations of Ukraine’s territorial sovereignty.

“The world is going through changes unseen in a hundred years, the international situation is intertwined with chaos,” Xi said alongside Putin on Tuesday.

“But I firmly believe that the friendship between China and Russia will continue for generations, and great countries’ responsibility to their people will not change.” The bloc’s origin story is only worth raising for the irony that it seems to represent.

It was conjured more than two decades ago as an analytic device by a British economist at Goldman Sachs — a totemic institution of American capitalism — to lump together some major non-Western economies that seemed poised to take off on the world stage (Brazil, Russia, India and China were the original four).

Those nations were joined by South Africa in 2010, and much more recently, Iran, Egypt, Ethiopia, and the United Arab Emirates, with Turkey and a handful of others waiting in the wings.

The bloc already represents almost 50 percent of humanity and may soon reflect a global majority.

Yet the grouping is still weaker than the sum of its parts.

Much divides its major players, from the political systems of their governments to their geographies to their geopolitical and economic interests.

They differ in principle and approach on hot-button global issues like the wars in Ukraine and Gaza, and are not wholly aligned on some of the broader ambitions floated by leaders in the bloc, including weaning international trade off its dependence on the U.S.

dollar and blunting the unique threat posed by U.S.

sanctions.

Countries like Brazil and India may subscribe to the overarching philosophy of the BRICS as an institution that can help shape the new “multipolar” world in an age of waning U.S.

and Western influence, but they are not interested in subscribing to an anti-Western alliance.

Both were originally skeptical of China and Russia’s push to expand the bloc, seeing it as an implicit attempt to dilute their own clout.

Some analysts in both countries argue they may be better off quitting the enterprise all together.

“For us, the United States is by far the most important partner in terms of our future growth and technologies and access to technologies, and therefore, we don’t want a situation where BRICS become the focal point of conflict with the West on the economic political fronts,” Kanwal Sibal, former foreign secretary in India and former ambassador to Russia, told my colleagues in an interview .

“So while we are in there, we would like to have more cooperation within BRICS and work on a positive agenda for the form of the international system in a cooperative mode, rather than in a confrontational mode,” Sibal said.

“Otherwise the BRICS will move in a direction which would become pronouncedly anti-Western.” Some analysts contend that Russia’s wielding of the bloc as an anti-Western cudgel risks undermining it altogether.

“Russia is using an analysis that often starts correctly — identifying some grievance and frustrations of how African countries have been dealt with by global powers.

But this narrative is sometimes overstretched when Russia presents itself as an alternative,” Gustavo de Carvalho, an analyst focusing on BRICS with the South African Institute of International Affairs, told The Washington Post .

Yet at a time of considerable dysfunction in the world’s major multilateral institutions like the United Nations, the BRICS format has led to more concrete cooperation between smaller sets of states that find themselves under its umbrella.

“Member countries have also sewn invisible but hugely important ties through constant mid-level meetings to deepen relations on trade and investment, diplomacy, law, finance, and more.

At heart is the idea that emerging economies can’t emerge unless they nudge the leviathan out of the sun,” Foreign Policy’s Keith Johnson noted .

“The animating ideas behind BRICS — reformed global governance and greater political and financial sovereignty — are still today just broad enough to harbor the whole sprawling membership.” “For all its flaws and checkered actors, the growing BRICS is among the many necessary correctives to an out-of-balance world,” wrote Sarang Shidore , director of the Global South program at the Quincy Institute think tank in Washington.

“It cannot replace a flailing U.N.

system.

But the persistence and growth of BRICS demonstrates that, while fragmentation may dominate today’s headlines, the impulse for collective action, however uneven and fitful, remains very much alive.” More the reason why, Alexander Gabuev and Oliver Stuenkel argued in Foreign Affairs , the United States and other Western powers should take the bloc more seriously — and work to redress some of its grievances.

“Wealthy countries can also be better problem solvers for poorer countries, including by sharing technology and assisting with the green transition,” they wrote.

“And the West should make more genuine efforts to democratize the global order, such as by doing away with the anachronistic tradition that only Europeans head the IMF and only U.S.

citizens lead the World Bank.”

</CONTENT>
