<TITLE>Pro-China activists harassed anti-Xi Jinping protesters in San Francisco</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2024-09-03</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/interactive/2024/chinese-communist-party-us-repression-xi-jinping-apec/?pwapi_token=eyJ0eXAiOiJKV1QiLCJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiJ9.eyJyZWFzb24iOiJnaWZ0IiwibmJmIjoxNzI1MzM2MDAwLCJpc3MiOiJzdWJzY3JpcHRpb25zIiwiZXhwIjoxNzI2NzE4Mzk5LCJpYXQiOjE3MjUzMzYwMDAsImp0aSI6IjRjNTY0OTY5LTU3ZWUtNDlmMi1hNjE3LThkM2QxNjg3YWZjZCIsInVybCI6Imh0dHBzOi8vd3d3Lndhc2hpbmd0b25wb3N0LmNvbS93b3JsZC9pbnRlcmFjdGl2ZS8yMDI0L2NoaW5lc2UtY29tbXVuaXN0LXBhcnR5LXVzLXJlcHJlc3Npb24teGktamlucGluZy1hcGVjLyJ9.WFD_Oifq-2HbnaO9Su73BNfZQzgj10CqM2-JsAZdafE&amp</URL>
<AUTHOR>Shibani Mahtani, Meg Kelly, Cate Brown, Cate Cadell, Ellen Nakashima, Chris Dehghanpoor</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
A Washington Post investigation revealed that pro-China activists, including individuals with ties to the Chinese government's United Front Work Department, harassed and violently attacked anti-Xi Jinping protesters during his visit to San Francisco.
-  The investigation, based on thousands of photos, videos, and witness accounts, showed coordinated aggression by groups of young men.
-  Chinese diplomats and officials were observed interacting with, and sometimes directly participating in, the harassment.
-  The Chinese Consulate in Los Angeles funded the travel and meals for pro-CCP protesters, incentivizing their participation.
-  This behavior, according to the article, is part of a broader pattern of Chinese influence and repression abroad, specifically targeting dissent against the CCP.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- A spokeswoman for the bureau said it could not confirm nor deny the existence of an investigation, citing department policy.
- The goal in San Francisco, analysts and officials say, was to present a view of the Chinese diaspora as being overwhelmingly pro-CCP and loyal to Xi, erasing dissenting voices who have fled to the United States in significant numbers because of domestic repression.
- Beijing “wants to show the people [back] in China how American people welcome Xi,” said Gao Guangjun, a New York-based lawyer who escaped China following the Tiananmen Square massacre and is familiar with the Chinese diaspora in the United States.
- “It’s propaganda,” he added, “that’s the reason they spend a lot of money on it.” Acts of violence Of the more than a dozen attacks against activists that The Post tallied over the four days that Xi was in San Francisco, among the most severe was an assault on Zhang Kaiyu, a 51-year-old Chinese man, and his two friends, Chau Kaihung, 73, and Li Delong, 40, all immigrants from mainland China and Hong Kong.
- On Nov.
- 17, the three men were walking away from a protest site when they passed a group of nine young men, some wearing red scarves used to signify support for the CCP during Xi’s visit.

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
Chinese diplomats and pro-China diaspora groups based in the United States organized demonstrations in San Francisco that harassed and silenced protesters opposed to Beijing’s policies, including through violence, during Chinese leader Xi Jinping’s visit to the city in November, a six-month investigation by The Washington Post shows.

The events in San Francisco illustrate how the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) is willing to extend its intolerance of any dissent into the United States and target people exercising their First Amendment rights in an American city.

It is part of a broader global pattern of China attempting to reach beyond its borders and suppress parts of its diaspora advocating against the CCP and ongoing rights abuses in Tibet, Xinjiang, Hong Kong and mainland China, the U.S.

government and human rights groups say.

A number of diaspora group leaders have long-standing links to Beijing, according to Chinese state media, photos of high-level events and interviews, including with Chinese activists, former FBI officials and researchers.

These include ties to the United Front Work Department, an arm of the Communist Party which uses non-state actors to further China’s political goals overseas, blurring the line between civilians and state officials.

Repression’s long arm This investigation into Xi’s visit to San Francisco during the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) summit is based on an analysis of more than 2,000 photos and videos from Students for a Free Tibet, the Hong Kong Democracy Council, the China Democracy Party, observers, social media and live streams; as well as interviews with more than 35 witnesses, U.S.

officials and analysts; text messages from American security guards working with Chinese diplomats, messages shared in Chinese diaspora WeChat groups, medical reports and police reports obtained by The Post.

The Post also used facial recognition software to search more than 21 hours of footage to identify the actions of pro-CCP diaspora group leaders and Chinese officials.

Several people were identified through leads from a separate facial recognition search engine, which were then independently verified by cross-referencing against news clips, interviews and publicly available information.

Some of the most violent figures were wearing face masks, sunglasses and hats that obscured their faces and could not be identified.

The Post investigation found: While there was aggression from both sides, the most extreme violence was instigated by pro-CCP activists and carried out by coordinated groups of young men embedded among them, verified videos show.

Anti-Xi protesters were attacked with extended flagpoles and chemical spray, punched, kicked and had fistfuls of sand thrown in their faces.

The Chinese Consulate in Los Angeles paid for supporters’ hotels and meals as an incentive to participate, according to messages shared in WeChat groups reviewed by The Post.

At least 35 pro-CCP Chinese diaspora groups showed up to the APEC summit protests — including groups from New York, Pennsylvania and Washington state.

Videos show at least four Chinese diplomats from the consulates in Los Angeles and San Francisco among the crowd of pro-CCP protesters, sometimes directly interacting with aggressive actors over four days of protests from Nov.

14-17.

Some Chinese diaspora group leaders with ties to the Chinese state participated in some of the violence, the videos show.

Chinese diplomats hired at least 60 private security guards to “protect” Chinese diaspora groups gathered to welcome Xi, according to seven people involved in the arrangement.

Four days in San Francisco Students for a Free Tibet and the Hong Kong Democracy Council in late July published a joint report on the events at APEC, which The Post also referenced.

Additionally, The Post worked with Audrye Wong, a fellow at the American Enterprise Institute and an assistant professor of political science and international relations at the University of Southern California, who has extensively researched China’s foreign influence efforts.

The Post contacted 14 individuals who directly represent or are affiliated with the pro-Beijing diaspora groups at APEC through emails, social media messages, phone calls or visits to their residences or offices.

Most did not respond to The Post’s inquiries; two declined to comment.

In response to extensive questions from The Post, Liu Pengyu, spokesman for the Chinese Embassy in Washington, and spokespeople from the Chinese consulates in New York, San Francisco and Los Angeles sent identical emailed statements, stating that members of Chinese communities traveled to San Francisco voluntarily to welcome Xi and were instead the ones subject to “multiple incidents of provocations and violence.” “A few U.S.

organizations and agencies have been piecing together fabricated ‘evidence’ to make defamatory assumptions and groundless ‘investigations’ about the voluntary welcoming groups, as well as smearing allusions to Chinese diplomats and consulates in the U.S.,” the emailed statements said.

“Such narratives are sheer political maneuvering, which China strongly opposes.

The Chinese side urges the U.S.

side to immediately stop the erroneous practices of hyping up falsehoods.” The statements also condemned what they said were “violent attacks” against “Chinese welcoming crowds,” adding that the Chinese Embassy has asked American authorities to investigate the violence.

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Beijing did not respond to inquiries.

Beijing billed Xi’s visit as the start of a new, friendlier chapter in U.S.-China relations, his first to the United States in six years.

But U.S.

officials described the events in San Francisco as an example of Beijing’s “transnational repression” — its efforts to intimidate and silence critics, including through violence, outside its borders.

“We are aware that some pro-PRC counter protesters clashed violently with groups peacefully demonstrating” at the APEC summit, State Department spokesman Vedant Patel told The Post.

“The PRC’s efforts to harass and threaten individuals … and undermine their enjoyment of freedoms of expression and assembly are unacceptable.” State Department officials raised concerns about the violence and intimidation directly with the Chinese government, according to a department official, who, like others in this story, spoke on the condition of anonymity because of the matter’s sensitivity.

The FBI, separately, is investigating the violence at the APEC summit, according to two officials familiar with the matter.

Several victims and an alleged perpetrator told The Post that they have been interviewed by the FBI since the summit.

A spokeswoman for the bureau said it could not confirm nor deny the existence of an investigation, citing department policy.

The goal in San Francisco, analysts and officials say, was to present a view of the Chinese diaspora as being overwhelmingly pro-CCP and loyal to Xi, erasing dissenting voices who have fled to the United States in significant numbers because of domestic repression.

Beijing “wants to show the people [back] in China how American people welcome Xi,” said Gao Guangjun, a New York-based lawyer who escaped China following the Tiananmen Square massacre and is familiar with the Chinese diaspora in the United States.

“It’s propaganda,” he added, “that’s the reason they spend a lot of money on it.” Acts of violence Of the more than a dozen attacks against activists that The Post tallied over the four days that Xi was in San Francisco, among the most severe was an assault on Zhang Kaiyu, a 51-year-old Chinese man, and his two friends, Chau Kaihung, 73, and Li Delong, 40, all immigrants from mainland China and Hong Kong.

On Nov.

17, the three men were walking away from a protest site when they passed a group of nine young men, some wearing red scarves used to signify support for the CCP during Xi’s visit.

The group started following Zhang, Chau and Li.

One of the young men yelled “F--- you!” Zhang said he felt emboldened to respond: “F--- Xi Jinping.” This was America, where he believed it was safe to speak his mind.

Then, almost immediately, they were surrounded and beaten.

The attack left Zhang briefly unconscious.

Video shows him dazed and bleeding.

He was taken to an emergency room where he was treated for signs of concussion and other wounds, he said.

The Post could not identify the men directly involved in the physical assault.

The South San Francisco Police Department, which initially investigated the case, forwarded the case file on Zhang to the FBI, according to people familiar with the matter.

“Everywhere we went … we were outnumbered and overwhelmed by the pro-CCP people,” Zhang said in an interview.

Flooding the zone The arrival of pro-Beijing groups in San Francisco was orchestrated by the Chinese Consulate in Los Angeles and state-linked community leaders.

The result was a contingent of hundreds of people decked out in coordinated uniforms, hats, banners and flags distributed to participants by pro-Beijing diaspora groups.

The Post identified 32 Chinese diaspora leaders who helped organize these contingents, many with ties to the Chinese state, according to a review of Chinese state-linked media, official Chinese government websites and social media pages, diaspora leaders’ social media pages, as well as photos and videos.

Among them was Los Angeles-based business owner Lu Qiang, a co-founder or founder of several pro-CCP organizations.

In an interview with the World Journal , one of the largest Chinese-language newspapers in the United States, Lu said he had organized 20 buses, booked 400 hotel rooms and coordinated 800 people arriving to welcome Xi at APEC.

On Nov.

15, while waiting for Xi’s motorcade to pass a hillside, Lu directed a group of Xi supporters away from an American YouTuber and comedian who was trying to engage with them.

Lu did not respond to multiple emailed requests for comment and told a Post reporter who visited his office in Los Angeles to leave the premises.

On the website for the alliance of Chinese restaurant owners in the United States, which Lu is on the advisory board of, he describes himself in a short bio as the “backbone” of the Chinese Consulate’s overseas consular assistance volunteers program.

The program is run by China’s Foreign Ministry and recruits high-profile Chinese diaspora leaders overseas to help consulates and embassies with administrative and other tasks.

Researchers from Safeguard Defenders, a nongovernmental organization that investigates China’s targeting of critics outside its borders, say the program is undeclared in most host countries.

It can be used to help Beijing keep tabs on the diaspora.

The Chinese American Federation, which Lu helped found, appeared to have one of the biggest contingents at APEC, with at least seven members of its leadership in attendance, according to interviews and The Post’s analysis of available footage.

The group posted about its participation online, with members discussing how they “defended the five-star red flag” of China against “harassment and disruption.” The Post contacted five leaders of the Chinese American Federation, including Pang Fei, its general director, through phone calls or visits to their offices or homes.

Pang declined to comment.

None of the other leaders contacted by The Post responded.

Other leaders traveled from farther afield, such as New York-based John Chan, also known by his Chinese name, Chen Shanzhuang.

Chan chairs the American Chinese Commerce Association, is affiliated with several other groups, and has helped offer consular services to the diaspora .

His work with the consulate in New York was listed under a section of China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs ’ website showcasing the contributions of state-linked and “Chinese-funded” overseas institutions.

Chan told a Chinese-language radio journalist at APEC that he was an organizer of the show of support for Xi, but that the crowd around him were “volunteers.” Chan posed for photos with other leaders of East Coast-based Chinese groups on Nov.

14.

During the demonstrations he was seen arguing with anti-CCP activists and journalists.

Chan and Lu attended an invitation-only banquet dinner for Xi during APEC, according to photos of the event.

Both men have been in the United States for more than three decades, according to their public profiles.

According to photos and Chinese state-linked media, Chan and Lu have also attended the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference — a political advisory body that puts forward proposals to Beijing.

Neither was seen being violent in available footage.

Wong, the USC assistant professor and AEI fellow, said for overseas Chinese like Chan and Lu, supporting CCP goals can provide political connections that further their business opportunities in China, and within their community in the United States.

“There is often a mix of self-interest and self-preservation reasons, beyond pure ideological belief, in driving public and private displays of loyalty to China,” Wong said, dynamics that help the CCP “cement [its] influence in ethnic Chinese diaspora communities.” Obscuring the opponent From the moment Xi arrived in San Francisco and over the course of the four-day summit, there was a concerted effort to block or obscure Hong Kong, Tibetan and Chinese dissidents.

Pro-CCP demonstrators tore down anti-CCP protesters’ banners and replaced them with Chinese flags, especially where Xi might have seen them from his motorcade.

A core group of individuals were at the forefront of efforts to physically remove signage and grab protesters on Nov.

15, including Chen Heng, chairman of the Fukien American Association; Chen Wu, the organization’s secretary general, both New York-based; and Yang Baohai, a San Francisco-based businessman, who chairs an organization called FJ by the Bay and is a youth team leader at the Western Fukien Benevolent Association.

From left, John Chan, Chen Heng and Chen Wu pose alongside other Chinese diaspora leaders holding an oversized Chinese flag in San Francisco on Nov.

14.

(Screenshot/eStarTV) Each of their organizations represent members of the Fujian community, also spelled Fukien, who come from a coastal region in China known for outward migration.

The Fukien American Association is an 82-year-old organization that works closely with the Chinese Consulate in New York, whose diplomats have publicly spoken at and supported its events, according to photos from events and Chinese-language news reports.

Yang Baohai publicly supports core pro-CCP policies through his organization, including the unification of Taiwan and China, and also protested now-Taiwanese president Lai Ching-te’s 2023 visit to the United States.

Yang wrote in 2022 that Chinese people in America “firmly believe” that the “motherland must be reunified and will be reunified,” and would contribute his “own strength in this great journey.” All three men tried to intervene when Tsela Zoksang, a 20-year-old Tibetan student activist, climbed up a light pole outside the Hyatt Regency in downtown San Francisco on Nov.

15.

The hotel was where Xi was dining at the time with American business leaders including Elon Musk and Tim Cook.

Executives paid $2,000 a head to be there.

Zoksang’s sign read: “Xi Jinping, your time is up.” As Zoksang climbed, Yang walked across the street with a Chinese flag that dwarfed the crowd.

At the same time, Chen Heng attempted to take the sign away from Zoksang.

“They were pulling at the flags, pulling at my limbs,” Zoksang said in an interview.

Police moved in and pushed the crowd away from the pole.

Chen Wu directed Chen Heng and others as they lifted an extended flagpole carrying a massive Chinese flag in an attempt to reach her.

A few hours later, four Tibetan activists unfurled a banner with the same message from a parking lot across the street.

They and witnesses said a group of people on a lower floor of the garage tugged forcefully on the banner and ripped it down, nearly pulling one of the Tibetans over the concrete ledge.

His hands and arms burned with lacerations.

Students for a Free Tibet hung a banner from a parking garage facing the hotel where Chinese President Xi Jinping was dining with U.S.

business leaders on Nov.

15.

(Courtesy of Students for a Free Tibet) The Tibetans rushed downstairs and found a group of men, most of their faces masked, holding the banner and running toward the elevators.

The activists confronted the men and tried to film them.

The Post identified Chen Wu and Chen Heng among the men running from the handful of Tibetan activists.

At least six additional men seen running with the banner were also with New York-based Fujian leader John Chan for the majority of the evening, video shows.

Chen Wu did not respond to WeChat message requests and requests for comment sent through the Fukien American Association.

Yang did not respond to emailed questions.

John Chan did not respond to questions sent via email or text message.

Chen Heng, chairman of the Fukien American Association, denied any involvement in violent incidents but told The Post that “conflicts” between anti-CCP protesters and Beijing supporters are common at similar events.

“Some of the newcomers from these groups may be dissatisfied with the welcome [effort] … I think the extent of the fights are, at most, for example, they put something up, we take it down and so on, but there are no [violent] conflicts,” he said of the videos that showed him present.

He said he heard of violent incidents during the summit but did not witness them.

“China-U.S.

relations are getting better and better, it would be best if there is nothing wrong, right?” said Chen Heng, who is a U.S.

citizen.

He said his group came to San Francisco to support warming ties between Washington and Beijing.

But some analysts said the events in San Francisco were an extension of Chinese state policy to repress groups such as the Tibetans, Uyghurs and Hong Kongers, and silence them, even outside China.

“From Australia to Europe and across North America … [the CCP] mobilizes surrogates to ostracize, intimidate, surround and silence the activists,” said Glenn Tiffert, a distinguished research fellow at the Hoover Institution and a historian of modern China.

“The tactics differ, the goal is the same: to isolate, bury and extinguish so that it alone monopolizes the field.” Also on Nov.

15, a Chinese activist named Wang Wei wearing a “free China” armband got into an argument with a group of CCP supporters, identifiable by the red scarves draped around their necks.

Video shows that as the argument escalated to a fight, the CCP supporters used Chinese flags to try to obscure cameras from capturing the violence.

Wang was jabbed with a flagpole and kicked in the head, he said in an interview.

Passersby called for an ambulance.

Wang said he received a CT scan and was cleared by doctors but suffered bruises on his head and finger.

By the end of that day, the pro-CCP contingent including Yang became more aggressive, stalking protesters and using gloves with metal knuckles, metal rods and flagpoles in scuffles, videos show.

The next day, one area where Chinese diplomats passed through on their way to the summit became particularly tense — one pro-CCP protester smashed a glass bottle over a man’s head; another deployed chemical spray against anti-CCP protesters.

Chen Chuangchuang, an activist and former Chinese human rights lawyer, was left reeling from the spray while others were bleeding, video and interviews showed.

“I didn’t expect it,” Chen Chuangchuang said.

“Before we went to San Francisco we did anticipate there would be some arguments and conflict, but not at this level.” An official mandate The Post identified at least four Chinese diplomats at the protests.

Two were from the consulate in Los Angeles: Li Chunlin, the deputy consul general, and Meng Shiwei, a con

</CONTENT>
