<TITLE>In a warming world, English sparkling wine challenges French champagne</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2024-10-28</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2024/10/28/english-sparkling-wine-champagne-climate-change/</URL>
<AUTHOR>William Booth</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
English sparkling wines are gaining popularity, winning awards, and sometimes outperforming French Champagne.
-  Rising temperatures in the UK, a key factor, have created ideal growing conditions for grapes, allowing for a flourishing British wine industry.
-  More than 1,000 vineyards and 400 wineries now exist in the South of England.
-  English winemakers are successfully cultivating grapes like Chardonnay, Pinot Noir, and Pinot Meunier, used for sparkling wines.
-  These wines, often produced with minimal intervention, have been recognized by awards like the IWSC Wine Producer of the Year, demonstrating their quality.
-  The rise of British sparkling wine is a significant shift, even prompting some playful "schadenfreude" in the face of competition with French Champagne.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- Since the 1990s, the average temperature in Britain has risen by 1 degree Celsius , or 1.8 degrees Fahrenheit.
- All 10 of the warmest years in the United Kingdom have occurred since 2003 — with 2022 the hottest year on record.
- Scientists warn that this signals a dangerous trajectory.
- While the warming may appear subtle in the drizzly English countryside, the grapes can certainly feel it.
- “It doesn’t sound like a lot, does it?

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
DORCHESTER, England — Not too long ago, if you asked a French bon vivant if they would like a nice glass of British bubbly, they may have laughed, as in, surely you jest.

Not anymore.

English sparkling wines are winning gold medals in blind tastings and routinely competing with (and occasionally besting) wines from the fabled champagne houses in France.

You probably can guess why: climate change.

Since the 1990s, the average temperature in Britain has risen by 1 degree Celsius , or 1.8 degrees Fahrenheit.

All 10 of the warmest years in the United Kingdom have occurred since 2003 — with 2022 the hottest year on record.

Scientists warn that this signals a dangerous trajectory.

While the warming may appear subtle in the drizzly English countryside, the grapes can certainly feel it.

“It doesn’t sound like a lot, does it? One degree?” said meteorologist Stephen Dorling, who studies British viticulture.

But it makes all the difference to a pinot noir vine, which needs 14 degrees Celsius, not 13 degrees Celsius, to thrive.

The Post’s William Booth reports that a warming world now sees England growing grapes to make sparkling wine that rivals the French.

(Video: William Booth, Zoeann Murphy/The Washington Post) A generation ago, Britain had no discernible wine industry.

Today the growth is explosive.

There are now more than 1,000 vineyards and 400 winemakers in the south of England.

The area has the same fast-draining, chalky soil found in France’s Champagne region, and so British growers are cultivating their expertise in the big three grape varieties that make sparkling wine: chardonnay, pinot noir and pinot meunier.

“You couldn’t even imagine growing these grapes in England before,” said Tommy Grimshaw, head winemaker at Langham Wine Estate in Dorset.

Grimshaw and a crew were harvesting this month, snipping off the deep purple bunches from the trellis and carefully placing the grapes in crates, which were quickly moved to the winery.

In the sheds, the grapes were loaded into a pneumatic press, which uses a kind of inflatable balloon to gently but properly smush them.

The juice then goes into tall stainless steel settling vats and then to oak barrels imported from France.

Later they go into green glass bottles.

Langham produces a “low intervention” sparkling wine — no filtration, indigenous yeast only.

The winery has regularly medaled at the International Wine and Spirit Competition, and was named wine producer of the year in 2020.

Judges praised its blanc de blanc as “balanced, complex and crisply textural, displaying fine bubbles.” There has been some celebration, even schadenfreude, at the rise of drinkable bubbly in a country that so relishes competition with France, and where generations of gentry have consumed vast reservoirs of champagne.

Winston Churchill was devoted to the 1928 Pol Roger.

The British royal family now regularly serves English sparkling at state banquets (alongside French grand cru wines).

Chapel Down winery pulled a cheeky stunt last year, setting out a table in the French city of Reims, disguising its own bottle with a label reading “Chapelle en Bas” and encouraging passersby to compare it to a local favorite, Moet et Chandon Brut Imperial.

According to the British winery, 60 percent of a small sample preferred the English version.

The headline in the Daily Mail tabloid read: “It’s enough to make the French fizz with rage! English sparkling wine triumphs over champagne in blind taste test.” English sparkling wines, as good as they are getting, will never be “champagne,” a name reserved for the effervescent wines from the region in northeast France, where strict rules for production apply.

Britain is more anything-goes.

The government announced recently that it would allow English sparkling wines to forgo the use mushroom-shaped corks and foil covers on bottlenecks, if they wish.

Such a move would be unthinkable in France.

The story is still very David and Goliath.

England produced 8.3 million bottles of sparkling wine last year.

France did almost 300 million bottles.

English sparkling wine is mostly produced by the “traditional method,” just like its French counterpart, with a price point aimed at the midrange market.

Because the industry is new, English vintners can’t compete with the French houses selling older, very expensive vintages.

But British winemakers are in a planting frenzy, as some classic regions in France may soon be almost too warm.

Justin Langham, who owns the Dorset estate that carries his family name, cautioned that climate change isn’t a surefire win for British wine.

Langham, who has been farming all his life, planted his first 30 acres of grapes in 2009.

Last year, he had a bumper crop.

This year, while the individual grapes were bursting with the acidity and sugar that make a fine sparkling wine, the overall yield was low.

“You can get a concentration of flavors in a smaller crop,” he said.

“The quality will be good this year, just not as much of it.” This is what climate change produces: warmer weather, yes, but more fickle, more extreme weather — alternating droughts and downpours, stubborn heat waves and freaky frosts.

England is typically rainy but less so in summer.

During this year’s growing season, which ran from April to October, vineyards in southern England were soaked.

Sunshine was an infrequent visitor.

The yield at the Langham Estate was down 70 percent from average.

What happens with too much rain? “Mildew and disease,” Langham said.

Wind is tricky, too.

A little breeze is good.

It pollinates the flowers and produces the fruit.

Wind is also good for drying the grapes after a spot of rain.

But too much wind? “Not good,” Langham said.

“We are in a warming trend, which is nice for England, which allows us to grow the varieties of grape that are very popular,” Dorling said.

“But this comes with greater variability.

And these two things are happening at the same time, which is helpful and unhelpful.” Climate change giveth and taketh.

As the planet continues to warm, will they soon be growing grapes in Scotland, as terrifying as that might sound? Quite possibly, said Dorling, who as head of innovation for WeatherQuest helps businesses cope with climate change.

“Sweden is a new wine frontier now,” he said.

Climate change, overall, is proving challenging to what is now a global industry.

The International Organization of Vine and Wine reported that in 2023 “extreme climatic conditions and widespread fungal diseases severely impacted many vineyards worldwide, culminating in a historically low global wine production … and represented the lowest output since 1961.” The French, of course, are hyper-alert to the changes in the weather.

France’s Ministry of Agriculture said production at Champagne vineyards is expected to fall by 16 percent this year.

“Increasingly intense extreme weather events, such as heat waves or torrential rains, are causing significant damage,” the Research Institute for Agriculture, Food and the Environment in France reported in March.

The French houses are doing all they can to continue to produce great champagne, including harvesting grapes a month earlier than they used to.

The champagne houses, too, are quite capable of crossing the English Channel themselves.

Two famous ones, Taittinger and Pommery, have been planting vines in England.

Last month, Taittinger hosted the Duchess of Edinburgh at its new winery in Kent, and announced the first 100,000 bottles of “Domaine Evremond,” English sparkling wine, to be sold in March for around $67 a pop.

Vitalie Taittinger, the first female president of Maison Taittinger since its 1734 founding, said in remarks to the media that the forthcoming vintage will be “very elegant, but with no comparison with champagne.” Asked what he imagined the famous French houses thought of their British challengers, Langham gave a shrug.

“They have a changing climate.

We have a changing climate.

We’re both going to have to adapt.”

</CONTENT>
