<TITLE>CLINTON SENDS CARTER, POWELL AND NUNN TO HAITI</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2024-01-05</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.washingtonpost.com/archive/politics/1994/09/17/clinton-sends-carter-powell-and-nunn-to-haiti/11df9007-e411-4493-8aba-2594e15b2649/</URL>
<AUTHOR>Ruth Marcus, Ann Devroy</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
President Clinton sent a delegation of Jimmy Carter, Colin Powell, and Sam Nunn to Haiti to negotiate the departure of the military leaders, potentially averting a US invasion.
-  The delegation's mandate is limited to discussing the leaders' exit, not the larger political situation.
-  Haitian military leader Lt.
- Gen.
- Raoul Cedras indicated he would meet with Carter to discuss his departure.
-  The US administration believes the delegation's inclusion of respected figures like Carter, Powell, and Nunn will assuage domestic and international criticism of the impending military action.
-  The US is preparing for a potential invasion by Sunday, regardless of the outcome of the talks.
-  The primary goal of the mission is to achieve a peaceful resolution to the crisis, while maintaining the military timetable.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- " National security adviser Anthony Lake made the announcement of the delegation at the White House after a day in which Clinton sought to build public support for a military action and display international backing for it as the final pieces of the military invasion force moved into place.
- Officials said all of it would be in readiness by Sunday, and they have strongly hinted military action would come by then or shortly afterward.
- A senior administration official said the delegation's makeup was meant to send a distinct set of signals to the nation.
- "None of them has been supportive of a military action publicly.
- If these three get stiffed by Cedras, Americans are going to say the president gave it a good shot," said an official.

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
President Clinton yesterday named a negotiating team headed by former president Jimmy Carter to go to Haiti to seek a last-minute departure of the nation's military leaders that would avert an imminent United States invasion.

The delegation, which leaves this morning, also includes former Joint Chiefs of Staff chairman Colin L.

Powell and Senate Armed Services Committee Chairman Sam Nunn (D-Ga.).

The White House said the group has a mandate to negotiate only the manner by which the three military leaders in charge of Haiti's de facto government will leave.

The talks will neither be lengthy nor delay the timetable for U.S.

military action, an administration official said.

The mission was arranged after Haitian armed forces chief Lt.

Gen.

Raoul Cedras indicated yesterday to Carter that he would accept a meeting whose agenda was limited to discussing his departure, officials said.

Carter had been having discussions with Cedras for several days.

The White House suggested adding Powell and Nunn to the delegation, and Cedras accepted.

Last night U.S.

Ambassador to Haiti William Swing said on ABC's "Nightline," "I think there has been a mood shift" on the part of Haiti's leaders toward a more "sober" position.

He attributed the change to Clinton's tough Thursday speech making clear an invasion was imminent if Cedras did not depart.

Even if Cedras and the other two senior Haitian military officials accept Clinton's ultimatum that they leave "immediately," a massive military landing by U.S.

forces would still occur.

Officials have always said that essentially the same military forces would go into Haiti, to maintain order and help build a democratic environment, whether the leaders left or resisted.

If the military government leaves voluntarily, an official said, "There would be no one in charge of the government; in charge of civil order." He said that "restoring {exiled} President {Jean-Bertrand} Aristide and maintaining civil order in the process of restoring democracy have always been the mission." National security adviser Anthony Lake made the announcement of the delegation at the White House after a day in which Clinton sought to build public support for a military action and display international backing for it as the final pieces of the military invasion force moved into place.

Officials said all of it would be in readiness by Sunday, and they have strongly hinted military action would come by then or shortly afterward.

A senior administration official said the delegation's makeup was meant to send a distinct set of signals to the nation.

"None of them has been supportive of a military action publicly.

If these three get stiffed by Cedras, Americans are going to say the president gave it a good shot," said an official.

"Americans know Carter as a genuine peacemaker; they know Powell and Nunn are not going to get danced around there." The move also may blunt harsh criticism in Congress of the invasion plans.

Even before the announcement was made, Senate Minority Leader Robert J.

Dole (R-Kan.) and other critics were calling on Clinton to send a high-level emissary.

"We should not shoot first and ask questions later," Dole said, recommending Powell as the emissary and calling him a man with "impeccable credentials and wide bipartisan support." The surprise announcement came just a day after Clinton in a televised address told the Haitian rulers that their "time is up" and that the United States had "exhausted diplomacy" in its dealings with Cedras.

A senior administration official, briefing reporters after the announcement, said the discussions with the Haitian leadership would only be about "the means of their departure." The opening of the talks did not indicate any backing off on Clinton's part and did not change the military timetable by "a second," the official said.

"It is flatly and absolutely the case that this does not alter the timetable in the slightest," the official said.

"This is a very urgent situation and they will conduct very urgent discussions." The official said Clinton decided to enlist the group because he "wished to pursue every possible alternative that would allow them to leave without bloodshed.

This discussion is in that context.

No policy, nothing has changed, since the president's statement {Thursday} night.

Nothing in this changes either the urgency of the situation or the timetable of our military preparations." The official said that Carter "has been in touch for some time with General Cedras and this emerged out of those discussions." He said Clinton had spoken with all three men over the past several days, and that the Haitians had agreed to meet with the delegation.

The trio, who will be accompanied by officials from the National Security Council and Pentagon, is an unusual combination.

Carter traveled on his own to North Korea earlier this year, discomfitting some in the administration with his freelance diplomacy before securing an agreement from then North Korean leader, Kim Il Sung, to resume international inspections of nuclear facilities.

Powell worked with the administration in its earlier months, but has often been mentioned as a possible Republican presidential candidate to oppose Clinton in 1996.

Nunn, one of the Senate's leading voices on military issues, has been critical of the administration's Haiti policy and earlier this week spoke on the Senate floor against what he described as "a kick-the-door-down, invade-now approach." Nunn in his Senate speech outlined a different approach than the Clinton administration's plan for immediately restoring Aristide.

Nunn suggested persuading Cedras and other leaders to leave, holding new parliamentary elections, and only then returning Aristide to power.

Aristide, a populist leader who was elected president by a large majority in Haiti, was ousted by a military coup three years ago.

Carter knows both Aristide and Cedras from his role in monitoring the 1990 elections that put Aristide in power, and he had maintained conversations with Cedras over the past several months, officials said.

The Carter connection was one of several "avenues" being pursued to get the military leaders to discuss leaving, a senior official said, and it was seized upon when it came to fruition yesterday.

Asked how Clinton knows that Cedras will not propose elections and other tactics to delay the invasion, an official said: "We don't know.

He has given winks and nods and feints before.

But he knows our policy.

President Carter knows our policy.

There is no window for stalling." For most of yesterday, officials said, Cedras was giving no signs of adhering to Clinton's demand that he leave.

"There's no sign of that," United Nations Ambassador Madeleine K.

Albright said at a luncheon with Washington Post reporters and editors.

Albright said there had been "freelance" attempts by people outside the U.S.

government to negotiate with the Haitian leaders.

But she said that "for the most part what has happened in each of these cases is that they are trying to bargain the unbargainable -- which is they are trying to stay ...

They're making nonnegotiable demands." Before the dramatic announcement, Clinton and Aristide met with leaders of some of the 24 nations -- up from 17 announced previously -- that have pledged to contribute troops to the U.S.-led Haitian effort.

Aristide, underscoring some of the points that Clinton made in his Oval Office address Thursday night, emphasized his commitment to "peace and reconciliation," promising to relinquish power after the next scheduled presidential elections, in December 1995.

"We say no to vengeance, no to retaliation," Aristide said.

"Let us embrace peace...

.

The restoration of democracy will bring peace for all, reconciliation among all, respect and justice for every single citizen." Clinton told the assembled leaders in the East Room: "Our international coalition goes to Haiti to give democracy a chance.

We cannot guarantee it." He repeated that the United Nations would take over from the U.S.

effort in "months" -- Albright put the limit at eight months -- and that the U.N.

mission would leave within 18 months.

Much of the day for Clinton and other top administration officials involved a last-ditch effort to rally public support for the invasion.

Clinton and a bevy of senior officials met with a group of columnists and other opinion leaders at the White House, and top administration officials made the rounds of television shows.

White House officials pointed to overnight polls that showed an increase in public support after Clinton's Oval Office speech.

For example, a USA Today/CNN/Gallup poll of 371 people who watched the speech showed an increase from 40 percent to 56 percent in support for an invasion.

But such polls are among the most volatile measures of public opinion.

Albright said that after the invasion, if it occurs, the United States will move in the U.N.

Security Council to lift the economic sanctions against Haiti, leaving only the arms embargo and a few financial sanctions targeted against specific military officers and their supporters.

U.S.

troops will not mount a manhunt for Cedras and the other top Haitian military leaders, Albright said.

The administration drew a lesson from its failed pursuit in Somalia of clan leader Mohamed Farah Aideed.

"We have learned that a manhunt doesn't work," Albright said.

"If we get there and we capture them, they will be turned over to the Aristide government," she said, and "we presume they will be locked up." To solve the problem of prosecuting the military leaders, Albright said, one "possibility" is the establishment of a "truth commission" as was done after the civil war in El Salvador.

The commission would be a panel of independent experts to investigate past human rights abuses and point out those responsible.

Staff writer Gary Lee in Washington and correspondent Julia Preston at the United Nations contributed to this report.

</CONTENT>
