<TITLE>Jimmy Carter’s death prompts condolences, praise around the world</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2024-12-29</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2024/12/29/jimmy-carter-death-reaction/?utm_campaign=wp_main&amp;utm_medium=social&amp;utm_source=bluesky</URL>
<AUTHOR>Kyle Melnick</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
Former President Jimmy Carter passed away on Sunday, prompting condolences and praise from world leaders.
-  President Biden called Carter a selfless figure, and praised his human rights activism, conflict resolution, and kindness.
-  President-elect Trump also lauded Carter's efforts to improve the lives of Americans.
-  Carter's son highlighted his father's dedication to peace, human rights, and unselfish love.
-  Tributes focused on Carter's accomplishments, including the Camp David Accords, Panama Canal handover, and Habitat for Humanity work, as well as his broader humanitarian efforts.
-  Many leaders noted Carter's roles as both president and Sunday school teacher.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- Many of them complimented Carter’s human rights activism, conflict-resolution work and kindness from his presidency and the following decades.
- President Joe Biden said at a news conference from the U.S.
- Virgin Islands that everyone could learn lessons about selflessness from Carter’s life and legacy.
- “I see a man not only of our times, but for all times,” he said.
- “We could all do well to be a little more like Jimmy Carter.” Earlier Sunday, Biden and first lady Jill Biden said in a statement that Carter was their “dear friend” for more than six decades.
- “What’s extraordinary about Jimmy Carter, though, is that millions of people throughout America and the world who never met him thought of him as a dear friend as well,” their statement said.

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
Former president Jimmy Carter’s death Sunday prompted condolences and praise from current and former leaders in the United States and across the world.

Many of them complimented Carter’s human rights activism, conflict-resolution work and kindness from his presidency and the following decades.

President Joe Biden said at a news conference from the U.S.

Virgin Islands that everyone could learn lessons about selflessness from Carter’s life and legacy.

“I see a man not only of our times, but for all times,” he said.

“We could all do well to be a little more like Jimmy Carter.” Earlier Sunday, Biden and first lady Jill Biden said in a statement that Carter was their “dear friend” for more than six decades.

“What’s extraordinary about Jimmy Carter, though, is that millions of people throughout America and the world who never met him thought of him as a dear friend as well,” their statement said.

President-elect Donald Trump also praised Carter, writing on Truth Social that Carter “did everything in his power to improve the lives of all Americans.” “For that, we all owe him a debt of gratitude,” Trump wrote.

Carter’s son, James E.

Carter III, said in a statement that his father “was a hero, not only to me but to everyone who believes in peace, human rights, and unselfish love.” “The world is our family because of the way he brought people together,” Carter III said.

Many world and U.S.

leaders commended Carter for his work, including the historic agreement he brokered between Israel and Egypt in the late 1970s, giving control of the Panama Canal to Panama and building homes with Habitat for Humanity.

Others praised Carter’s Sunday school program at a Georgia church, his efforts to eradicate a tropical disease , his oversight of elections for fairness in troubled countries and his work to prioritize energy conservation .

“Jimmy Carter served as our commander-in-chief for four years, but he served as the beloved, unassuming Sunday school teacher at Maranatha Baptist Church in Plains, Georgia for forty,” Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Kentucky) said in a statement.

“And his humble devotion leaves us little doubt which of those two important roles he prized the most.” Former presidents shared praise for Carter, including Barack Obama, George W.

Bush and Bill Clinton.

Carter was the only Democrat elected president between Lyndon B.

Johnson’s and Clinton’s terms in the White House.

Clinton awarded Carter and his late wife , Rosalynn, the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 1999.

“He worked tirelessly for a better, fairer world,” Clinton said in a statement with Hillary Clinton, his wife and former secretary of state.

More than a dozen world leaders shared condolences for Carter and his family, often referring to the Nobel Peace Prize he received in 2002.

As president, Carter granted full diplomatic recognition to China, building on the opening made by President Richard M.

Nixon to normalize relations.

Chinese president Xi Jinping, in a statement expressing condolences, said Carter was “a promoter and decision-maker in the establishment of China-U.S.

diplomatic relations,” the state-run Xinhua News Agency reported on Monday.

In 1978, Carter returned the Crown of St.

Stephen , a legendary symbol of Hungary that was whisked out of the country in the closing months of World War II for safekeeping and was eventually given to the United States.

Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orban said on X on Sunday that Carter’s return of the 1,000-year-old relic “gave freedom-loving Hungarians hope in a hopeless time.” Egyptian President Abdel Fatah El-Sisi said on X that Carter’s role in creating a peace agreement between Egypt and Israel “will remain etched in the annals of history.” “He will be remembered as one of the world’s most prominent leaders in service to humanity,” Sisi said.

But Georgia politicians also complimented Carter for never forgetting his roots.

“As the only American president thus far to come from Georgia,” Republican Georgia Gov.

Brian Kemp said in a statement, “he showed the world the impact our state and its people have on the country.”

</CONTENT>
