<TITLE>White House sees ‘indications’ airliner was downed by Russia</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2024-12-27</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2024/12/27/azerbaijan-airlines-plane-crash-russia/</URL>
<AUTHOR>Mary Ilyushina, Missy Ryan</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
The White House believes Russian air defense systems downed the Azerbaijan Airlines flight that crashed in Kazakhstan on Christmas Day.
-  Preliminary findings from the Azerbaijani investigation suggest external interference, evidenced by wreckage and eyewitness accounts, including reports of explosions near Grozny before the crash.
-  The plane was diverted from Grozny, Russia, and crashed near Aktau, Kazakhstan.
-  The U.S.
- has offered assistance in the investigation.
-  Russian officials initially attributed the crash to weather and bird strikes, but evidence of damage consistent with an air-defense missile impact has emerged.
-  The crash killed 38 and injured 29.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- Evidence suggests the Azerbaijan Airlines flight that crashed in Kazakhstan on Christmas Day was brought down by Russia, the White House said Friday.
- “We have seen some early indications that would certainly point to the possibility that this jet was brought down by Russian air defense systems,” National Security Council spokesman John Kirby told reporters.
- He said the evidence went beyond widely circulated images of the damaged aircraft, but he did not provide details.
- Earlier Friday, the airline said the plane crashed “due to external physical and technical interference,” according to the preliminary findings of an investigation.
- “This is evidenced by the appearance of the plane’s wreckage on the ground and eyewitness testimony,” Azerbaijani Minister of Digital Development and Transport Rashad Nabiyev said, according to Azerbaijani media .

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
Evidence suggests the Azerbaijan Airlines flight that crashed in Kazakhstan on Christmas Day was brought down by Russia, the White House said Friday.

“We have seen some early indications that would certainly point to the possibility that this jet was brought down by Russian air defense systems,” National Security Council spokesman John Kirby told reporters.

He said the evidence went beyond widely circulated images of the damaged aircraft, but he did not provide details.

Earlier Friday, the airline said the plane crashed “due to external physical and technical interference,” according to the preliminary findings of an investigation.

“This is evidenced by the appearance of the plane’s wreckage on the ground and eyewitness testimony,” Azerbaijani Minister of Digital Development and Transport Rashad Nabiyev said, according to Azerbaijani media .

“The type of weapon used for the interference will be established by the investigation.” Azerbaijan Airlines Flight 8243 departed from Baku, the capital of Azerbaijan, shortly before 8 a.m.

local time Wednesday, for Grozny, the capital of Chechnya in Russia.

It was diverted from Grozny midflight and later crashed near Aktau in southwestern Kazakhstan.

Thirty-eight people were killed; 29 survived.

The U.S.

government has offered to assist Kazakh and Azerbaijani officials in the investigation, Kirby said.

Nabiyev said passengers and crew aboard the Embraer-190 aircraft were injured by “various cutting objects” that pierced the fuselage.

An Azerbaijan Airlines statement on Dec.

27 blamed “interference” for the Christmas Day plane crash that killed 38 people.

(Video: Alisa Shodiyev Kaff/The Washington Post) “The injured Russian citizens also reported hearing three explosions over Grozny,” he said.

“According to them, the sounds of explosions could be heard from outside, after which something hit the plane.” Azerbaijan Airlines said it was suspending flights to several Russian cities due to “potential risks to flight safety.” The suspensions will remain in effect until the investigation has been completed, it added.

Russian flight regulator Rosaviatsia said Friday that conditions at Grozny Airport were “complicated” due to a Ukrainian drone attack and thick fog, according to Russian state news agency Tass.

Dmitry Yadrov, the agency’s head, said Ukrainian drones were attacking civilian infrastructure in the area, prompting the introduction of security measures requiring all aircraft to leave the area near Grozny Airport.

The implementation of the “Karpet” lockdown mode implies the closure of the airspace in the airport’s area of ​​​​operation, analysts said.

But authorities did not close airspace over Grozny.

The plane was diverted from Grozny to an airfield in nearby Makhachkala but then headed toward Aktau in Kazakhstan, some 270 miles across the Caspian Sea, Nabiyev said.

The investigation will include whether the plane was given permission to land on Russian territory.

Russian officials initially said the plane went down due to weather and a collision with a flock of birds.

But the damage visible on the tail of the plane — seen in images and video circulating on social media and posted by authorities in Kazakhstan, where it crashed — could indicate the impact of an air-defense missile, experts said .

Citing anonymous Azerbaijani officials, news outlets including Reuters and Turkey’s state-run Anadolu News agency reported Thursday that Azerbaijan’s preliminary findings were that Russian air defenses caused the crash.

There has been no official confirmation of the reports from Azerbaijan.

The country’s aviation regulator said it would refrain from comment until the results of the investigation are published.

Flightradar24, a flight tracking service, said Wednesday on X that the plane was “exposed to GPS jamming and spoofing near Grozny.” Radar jamming is frequently employed as a defensive measure against drones.

Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov told reporters Friday that he has “nothing to add” to his previous statements that assessments should wait until the end of the investigation.

Several airlines, including the Israeli flagship carrier El Al and the Emirati budget airline FlyDubai, suspended flights to Russia, citing safety concerns.

Surviving members of the airline crew told Kazakhstani television that they felt “a blow from outside of the plane” as the pilots were attempting to land in Grozny for the third time due to fog.

Flight attendant Aidan Rahimli told Azerbaijan’s Xezer Xeber news website that she felt three loud blows as if something was impacting the plane from outside.

“After the first impact, the oxygen masks fell down in the cabin, and we rushed to check what had happened,” Rahimli said.

“At that moment, the second impact occurred, as a result of which another flight attendant, Zulfugar, received a wound to his left hand.” As Rahimli bandaged crewmate Zulfugar Asadov’s hand, the plane was impacted for the third time.

The pilots decided to change the landing site, Asadov told APA TV, but making a hard landing on water at such speed would have been risky, so the pilots “decided to steer the plane to land.” Asadov and Rahimli moved to the back of the aircraft to put on oxygen masks, which helped them survive.

Upon crashing, the plane broke into two parts.

The tail end remained largely intact, but the front immediately caught fire.

“When we hit the ground, I thought we were already dead because there was a strong shaking.

As if my whole body was shaking.

I did not expect to survive,” Asadov said.

“We survived thanks to the heroism of our crew commander and co-pilot.” Pilots Igor Kshnyakin, the flight captain, and Aleksandr Kalyaninov, the first officer, were killed in the crash.

Asadov and Rahimli dismissed the possibility of an oxygen tank explosion, which was circulated in Russian media on Thursday.

“If something had happened to the oxygen cylinder, the plane would have been torn to pieces,” Asadov told APA TV.

“This tragic situation arose due to external impact on the plane.” Azerbaijan has not accused Russia of hitting its plane, but anger in the country is mounting.

Opposition party Musavat issued a statement demanding that Moscow apologize for the incident and end the war in Ukraine.

“The [Vladimir] Putin regime must put an end to the aggressive war that has led to the massacre of the peoples of Ukraine and Russia and has also caused great losses to other peoples,” the party said in a statement published by Turan.

“Although the Azerbaijani authorities have stated that they expect Russia to admit and apologize through individual [legislators], the media and political institutions, they have not yet officially demanded this.

The Musavat Party calls on the authorities to be more principled on this issue.” “The plane was shot down on Russian territory,” Azerbaijani lawmaker Rasim Musabekov said Thursday.

“It is impossible to deny this.

… Those who did this must be held criminally responsible, and compensation must be paid.” Natalia Abbakumova contributed to this report.

</CONTENT>
