<TITLE>Putin does not deny presence of North Korean troops in Russia</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2024-10-24</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2024/10/24/putin-russia-north-korea-troops/</URL>
<AUTHOR>Francesca Ebel</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
Russian President Putin has seemingly acknowledged the presence of North Korean troops in Russia, citing a new mutual defense treaty.
-  Satellite images and reports from South Korean and U.S.
- intelligence agencies, as well as Ukraine's military intelligence, suggest thousands of North Korean soldiers are training in Russia, potentially for deployment in Ukraine.
-  The new Russia-North Korea defense treaty, ratified Thursday, commits both countries to military assistance if either is attacked.
-  This pact marks a significant escalation of cooperation between the two nations, and a show of defiance against Western sanctions.
-  Ukraine claims the North Korean troops will free up Russian units for combat in Ukraine, though Russia and North Korea deny supplying weapons for the war.
-  The agreement highlights a growing anti-Western alignment between Russia, North Korea, and Iran.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- KAZAN, Russia — Russian President Vladimir Putin appeared to obliquely acknowledge the presence of North Korean troops in Russia to foreign journalists Thursday and cited the article on mutual defense in the nations’ new security treaty.
- When asked about satellite images distributed by the South Korean intelligence agency purporting to show North Korean troops traveling to Russia, Putin responded that “images are a serious thing; if there are images, they reflect something,” while neither confirming or denying the accusation, which has also been made by the United States.
- The Russian president then mentioned the Russia-North Korea defense treaty , which was speedily ratified Thursday by Russia’s parliament.
- “As for our relations with the DPRK, the treaty was ratified today; it has Article 4.
- We have never doubted that North Korean leadership takes the agreement seriously,” he said.

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
KAZAN, Russia — Russian President Vladimir Putin appeared to obliquely acknowledge the presence of North Korean troops in Russia to foreign journalists Thursday and cited the article on mutual defense in the nations’ new security treaty.

When asked about satellite images distributed by the South Korean intelligence agency purporting to show North Korean troops traveling to Russia, Putin responded that “images are a serious thing; if there are images, they reflect something,” while neither confirming or denying the accusation, which has also been made by the United States.

The Russian president then mentioned the Russia-North Korea defense treaty , which was speedily ratified Thursday by Russia’s parliament.

“As for our relations with the DPRK, the treaty was ratified today; it has Article 4.

We have never doubted that North Korean leadership takes the agreement seriously,” he said.

Article 4 of the agreement states that if one country is subject to an “armed invasion,” the other country would provide “military and other assistance with all means in its possession.” It marks the strongest link between Moscow and Pyongyang since the end of the Cold War.

In August, Ukrainian forces crossed the border into Russia and occupied several hundred square miles of the Kursk region.

On Wednesday, the U.S.

government said it had evidence that at least 3,000 North Korean soldiers were being trained in Russia and called the troops “legitimate military targets” if they joined the war in Ukraine.

Ukraine’s military intelligence agency said Thursday that about 12,000 North Korean military personnel, including three generals, are being trained by Russia.

The agency added that one group of soldiers is already in Kursk, where Ukraine launched an incursion in August.

Ukraine has faced setbacks holding on to its gains in the region.

The agency said it is unknown whether the soldiers will be used in Russia or in Ukraine, but their arrival “will free up certain Russian army units that will be directly involved in combat operations on Ukrainian territory.” Kyiv’s head of Ukraine’s military intelligence, Gen.

Kyrylo Budanov, claims that North Korean forces are training at four ranges in and around Russia’s far east.

South Korean officials have made similar accusations about North Korean soldiers being trained in Russia.

North Korea is a significant supplier of arms to Russia, although both countries have rejected assertions by the United States and its allies that Pyongyang has provided Moscow with ballistic missiles and artillery shells for use in Ukraine.

In March, South Korean intelligence reported that North Korea has shipped around 7,000 containers filled with munitions and other military equipment to Russia.

Budanov claims that shipments began in late 2022 and have reached 2.8 million shells a year, just short of Russia’s own annual production of 2.9 million shells.

The Russian and North Korean strategic pact was signed during Putin’s rare, fawning visit to North Korea in June — his first in more than 20 years.

At the time, Putin stated that “the comprehensive partnership agreement signed today provides, among other things, for mutual assistance in the event of aggression against one of the parties to this agreement.” He added that Russia would also support North Korea’s right to “take justified measures” to ensure its national security.

The historic visit was designed as a show of defiance against Western sanctions and was the starkest marker yet of a growing new anti-Western alignment between Russia, North Korea and Iran.

Russia had backed United Nations sanctions against North Korea for years, but in March it vetoed a Security Council vote on extending a U.N.

panel of experts monitoring sanctions compliance.

Since then, senior Russian officials have repeatedly used the term “strangulation” to describe the U.N.

sanctions against Pyongyang.

For decades after the founding of North Korea in 1945, the Soviet Union served as its main economic and security benefactor.

Analysts say that North Korea benefits from newly renewed ties with Russia, possibly in exchange for badly needed food and economic aid and military assistance aimed at upgrading North Korean leader Kim Jong Un’s forces.

Likewise, as Putin faces growing isolation and a dwindling supply of artillery to use in Ukraine, North Korea has become one of Moscow’s few remaining sources of diplomatic and military support.

Serhiy Morgunov and David Stern in Kyiv contributed to this report.

</CONTENT>
