<TITLE>The $10,000 cruise that recently became possible — and might not last for long</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2024-10-27</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.washingtonpost.com/climate-environment/2024/10/27/norway-svalbard-cruise-industry-tourism-global-warming/?utm_campaign=wp_the7&amp</URL>
<AUTHOR>Chico Harlan</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
Arctic cruise tourism is booming, with seven-night voyages starting at $10,150, as melting sea ice opens new navigation routes.
-  However, this rapid warming, which is shrinking the Arctic ice by nearly 600,000 square miles over 20 years, is also threatening the very attractions that draw tourists.
-  Svalbard, a key Arctic cruise destination, saw record-breaking heat this year, with ice caps experiencing extreme melting.
-  Many tourists express an inner conflict between enjoying the beauty of the rapidly disappearing Arctic and recognizing the environmental impact of their travel.
-  The cruise industry is simultaneously capitalizing on the changing climate and facing the consequences, as tourists seek to witness the fragile ecosystem before it disappears.
-  These expeditions aim to raise awareness about climate change, potentially turning tourists into environmental advocates.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- The growing cruise numbers reflect thousands of complex personal decisions from tourists wanting to see the earth’s farthest reaches, even as they recognize how long-distance travel contributes to planet-warming emissions.
- In interviews in Longyearbyen, many cruise tourists said they were placing a premium on nature photography and seeing animals, particularly polar bears, while they still could.
- Some reasoned that witnessing the Arctic up close might improve their environmental awareness back home.
- Though any kind of long-distance travel produces planet-warming pollution, rarely do travelers wind up in a place where its consequences are so acute.
- In early August, NASA said that Svalbard’s ice caps had experienced a summer of “ extreme ” melting, and that was before the conclusion of a month that demolished heat records .

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
SVALBARD, Norway — The cruise company’s promotional video starts with a loop of Arctic nature at its most awe-inspiring: a surfacing whale, a lumbering walrus and a polar bear shrouded in mist.

It then cuts to a luxury vessel, slicing through seas surrounded by deep fjords, where a ticket for a seven-night voyage starts at $10,150.

In this spot warming faster than almost anywhere else on the planet, climate change is both an existential threat and a business opportunity.

Sea ice’s rapid melt has fed a polar cruise tourism boom by opening up easier navigational paths and extending the season.

But the very temperature rise that’s fueling the industry is poised to undercut it, by melting the attractions travelers are paying vast sums to see.

Svalbard experienced its hottest stretch on record this year, offering tourists a glimpse of the scenery that they know can disappear within a few decades.

Melanie Weber, 42, who’d spent five years saving money for the voyage, said she felt an “inner conflict” about vacationing in a place with such a grim climate reality.

To explain her thinking, she pulled out her phone to show a picture of a melting Alpine glacier and said the same logic applied here: Yes, it’s dying, she said.

It’s also beautiful.

“And I might be the last generation that gets to see this,” she said.

Svalbard is one of the main jumping-off points for Arctic cruises, and despite its remoteness — it’s about halfway between the top of continental Europe and the North Pole — cruise trips have doubled since 2016.

This year, roughly 500 cruise ships have docked in Longyearbyen, the main settlement in the archipelago.

While they range from boutique vessels with 12 berths to major liners with 14 decks and space for 3,000 passengers, most of the boats market themselves as expedition cruises, with 200 people or fewer.

That allows for voyages through the narrow fjords that are havens for wildlife.

The growing cruise numbers reflect thousands of complex personal decisions from tourists wanting to see the earth’s farthest reaches, even as they recognize how long-distance travel contributes to planet-warming emissions.

In interviews in Longyearbyen, many cruise tourists said they were placing a premium on nature photography and seeing animals, particularly polar bears, while they still could.

Some reasoned that witnessing the Arctic up close might improve their environmental awareness back home.

Though any kind of long-distance travel produces planet-warming pollution, rarely do travelers wind up in a place where its consequences are so acute.

In early August, NASA said that Svalbard’s ice caps had experienced a summer of “ extreme ” melting, and that was before the conclusion of a month that demolished heat records .

Over the past 20 years, the ice in the Arctic has shrunk by nearly 600,000 square miles, the equivalent of more than three Californias.

The handful of long-timers in Svalbard remember snowmobile rides for miles across the once-frozen water — the same waters where the cruise ships now appear in the spring.

Now, in the final weeks of the season, a dozen cruise passengers — from Taiwan, Australia, Britain, the United States — assembled one afternoon in a hotel lobby with their bags, long-lens cameras and waterproof boots.

They would spend the next 12 days navigating through the crevasses of the archipelago with a Swedish cruise operator, PolarQuest, whose website describes it as a “privilege” to “visit the parts of the world that are most exposed to climate change.” The group’s guide, Zet Freiburghaus, argued that these expeditions can turn tourists into evangelists.

“If nobody sees a place like this, there’d be nobody to protect it,” he said.

Cruising has a significant carbon footprint, he said, “but at least it makes you think: ‘How can we do better?’” He led the group into a van and down to the port.

The boat awaiting them looked different from most of the other cruise ships, smaller and older.

It was built in 1953, decked out in wood and brass.

The captain, Magnus Reteike, 50, said this would be his 18th and final cruise of the season.

As he stood at the doorway greeting everybody coming aboard, the temperatures were unusually balmy for mid-September, 40 degrees.

On the deck of the boat, the crew didn’t wear jackets.

‘Travel consciously’ Svalbard is a place where humans seemingly weren’t meant to belong.

It has no indigenous population.

It was discovered only by chance, by Dutch explorers seeking a northern sea passage to Asia.

After being thwarted by ice pack and polar bears, they ran into land they described as “nothing but mountains and sharp peaks.” Svalbard grew into a hub for whaling in the 17th century, then for coal mining in the 20th.

Across centuries, then, people braved this northern outpost chiefly because of activities that weren’t particularly good for the environment.

The cruise industry — and tourism in general — grew out of a Norwegian strategy to keep the archipelago viable, and maintain sovereignty, while de-emphasizing mining.

The considerations were largely geopolitical: Because of a 1920 treaty, Russia has certain economic rights to Svalbard, and the High North is increasingly crucial as global powers seek access to Arctic trade routes.

So long as Norway wants to maintain a settlement here, almost any activity will take an environmental toll.

Shipping supplies from mainland Europe.

Scientific research.

“All the scientists coming to talk about climate change, all the politicians, they do the same thing as everybody else” when they’re here, said Ronny Brunvoll, CEO of Visit Svalbard.

“They go on boat trips.” Polar cruise advocates make the case that the industry, while imperfect, is a far more responsible steward than what came before.

The expedition cruise companies adhere to guidelines designed to minimize any consequences for wildlife.

They allow passengers to embark only at spots preapproved by the Norwegian government.

Several years ago, an association for Arctic operators banned the use of heavy fuel.

Many companies, on their websites, highlight additional measures they’ve taken to reduce the environmental toll, such as eliminating single-use plastics or upgrading the technology of their ships.

Still, almost none of the companies operating in the Arctic publicly disclose their pollution data.

Cruising, though it contributes to just a fraction of the global total, emits more carbon dioxide per passenger per mile than flying.

Many of the operators go so far as to portray the Arctic vacations as being ecologically friendly or sustainable — claims that Elina Hutton, a PhD researcher on Arctic tourism at Finland’s University of Lapland, said “smell very much of greenwashing.” Zero-emissions fuels are not yet viable for cruise ships, and some companies purchase carbon credits with the goal of offsetting their environmental damage.

Sustainability is “at the heart of everything we do,” says Australia-based Aurora Expeditions.

“Travel consciously,” says French operator Ponant.

Arctic cruising has surged in tandem with tourism in the Antarctic.

As a result, some cruise vessels circumnavigate the planet over the course of a year, moving from pole to pole to capitalize on the peak season in both hemispheres.

“We strive toward make it as low an impact as possible, and to reduce CO2 emissions as low as possible,” said Marie Lannborn Barker, PolarQuest’s CEO, of cruising.

“But my feeling is primarily frustration that we have not come further.” She said that PolarQuest does not make sustainability claims in its marketing.

One of the most notable boats that cruises at both the world’s top and bottom is Le Commandant Charcot, a French “luxury icebreaker,” inaugurated three years ago, that gives wealthy tourists the chance to reach places they couldn’t have before.

It has the qualities of a hardened scientific research vessel, with powerful propulsion and a strengthened hull.

But it also has a detox bar.

And restaurant menus designed by Michelin-starred chef Alain Ducasse.

And an outdoor lagoon pool heated with energy recovered from the ship.

Twice this year, in July and September, it departed Svalbard for the North Pole.

Tickets started at $41,040.

During the first of those trips, Morven Muilwijk trailed behind it.

He’s an oceanographer for the Norwegian Polar Institute, and he was stationed on a research icebreaker during a month of work in the Arctic, taking samples of ocean water and ice cores, along with 30 other scientists.

Though Muilwijk had sailed through the Arctic many times, he was stunned by the thinness of the ice.

His own vessel went as far north as the 88th parallel “as if driving though butter,” he said.

He described the experience as “depressing.” He was too far from Le Commandant Charcot to see it.

But even if he’d been closer, he said, visibility was poor.

As one increasingly common consequence of the moisture and melting, the Arctic, for weeks on end, is enshrouded by fog.

Shrinking glaciers Then, on another foggy day later in the season, about 25 tourists filed onto a boat.

It was just a day cruise, but it offered an opportunity much like the longer expeditions to see a fast-changing place in comfort.

The boat, the MS Bard, had sleek lines, plush booths and floor-to-ceiling windows.

It had a bar on the first level with coffee and beer and a basket of free Scandinavian pastries.

And, as the guide noted to passengers, it also offered free WiFi.

“So you can brag about the experience you’re having with us,” said the Slovakian-born guide, Bee Pucikova.

The journey’s destination was a glacier, named the Nordenskiöld, one of the archipelago’s many rapidly melting spots.

But as the boat pushed away from port, moving into the main channels, it felt less like a sightseeing tour than a sensory deprivation plunge into whiteness.

The coastlines, wherever they stood, were invisible.

The sea, still and flat, had the same tone as the sky.

At one point, the captain exited the bridge and said to passengers that he felt like he was losing his mind, navigating through the abyss.

“Hopefully the weather will improve, but this is Svalbard for you,” Pucikova said.

The MS Bard carried on in the direction of the glacier.

Pucikova passed the time by showing educational charts about jet streams and phytoplankton.

Guests trickled to the lower deck to order drinks.

At one point, as a sightline opened through the mist, passengers spotted an arctic fox along a mountainside.

Twenty minutes later, a flash of black — the dorsal fin of a minke whale — sprouted from the water.

It was nature at its most fleeting: On camera phones, it presented as little more than a scratch on the lens.

The passengers included a German, a Dane, an elderly Chinese couple and two university students, as well as a pair of Indian brothers.

One, Pawan Priyadarshi, 33, a software engineer working in Barcelona, said he’d stumbled upon Svalbard by looking at Google Maps.

He’d long gravitated toward adventurous travel, he said, and this seemed like a place that might fit his style.

“I watched Nat Geo as a kid,” Priyadarshi said.

“And a place like this would have seemed too far away when I was young.

And now I’m almost here.” After two hours of sailing, the fog lifted just enough to reveal a line of icy, luminescent blue on the horizon.

There it was: the Nordenskiöld glacier.

People put down their coffees, zipped up their coats and headed onto the deck, even though it was still several miles away.

Gradually, as the boat moved closer, a smattering of ice chunks appeared in the water, and a more complex picture came into view.

The glacier had appeared from afar like a dominant, jagged ice castle.

But it was in fact a long but shrunken flow framed by muddy, brown hills.

The glacier had once run all the way to the coastline; now it stopped shy, revealing bald rocks.

The guide noted that one could hear the crackling of calving.

Even without science, without any context, the Nordenskiöld looked sickly.

“It’s smaller than I thought it would be,” Priyadarshi said.

He shrugged.

“But it’s nice.” Pucikova said she’d been taking groups here since 2021 and had seen signs of the ecosystem unraveling in just three years.

After an eternity of continuing to the water’s edge, the glacier now terminates on land, according to recent research .

Pucikova said the Nordenskiöld had retreated two miles over the past 130 years.

On the vessel, she didn’t feel the need to add an explanation about the reasons for the changes.

“People don’t want to be in a lecture theater,” she later said.

Passengers returned from the deck as the MS Bard pulled away and started the route back to Longyearbyen.

Downstairs, at the cafe level, a cinder-block-size chunk of sea ice was sitting in what looked like a champagne bucket, displayed like a sculpture.

A crew member said he’d fished it from the sea with a net.

“You can order a whiskey over glacier ice,” he said.

“Or an Aperol spritz.”

</CONTENT>
