<TITLE>U.S., France and other nations call for Israel-Hezbollah cease-fire deal</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2024-09-25</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2024/09/25/france-says-it-is-working-with-us-israel-hezbollah-cease-fire-deal/</URL>
<AUTHOR>Michael Birnbaum, Rachel Pannett, John Hudson</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
The US, France, and several Arab nations are pushing for a 21-day cease-fire between Israel and Hezbollah in Lebanon.
-  Diplomatic efforts, centered around the UN General Assembly, have resulted in a proposed deal supported by the G7, EU, and various Arab nations.
-  Key players like the Biden administration and French government have been instrumental in these negotiations.
-  While Israel's military chief has prepared for a possible ground incursion,  U.S.
- officials are optimistic that the Lebanese and Israeli governments will accept the cease-fire in the coming hours, allowing for civilian return.
-  The agreement, however, does not directly involve Hezbollah, potentially making its implementation challenging.
-  The goal of the cease-fire is a comprehensive resolution enabling residents to return to their homes in both countries.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- NEW YORK — The United States, France and several Arab nations were among the countries that on Wednesday jointly called for a 21-day cease-fire deal to avert a wider conflict between Israel and Hezbollah in Lebanon.
- The diplomatic push for a temporary halt in fighting comes as Israel’s military chief told soldiers to prepare for a possible ground incursion into Lebanon .
- Biden administration officials, briefing reporters under ground rules of anonymity, said they expected that the Israeli and Lebanese governments would accept the deal “in the coming hours.” The cease-fire deal is the product of days of frantic diplomacy at the United Nations, with many key leaders gathered in New York for the annual general assembly, which has coincided with Israel’s intensified campaign against Hezbollah targets in Lebanon.
- Hundreds have been killed , according to Lebanon’s Health Ministry, as Israel unleashed a wave of airstrikes and turned electronic devices into bombs.
- The Biden administration and the French government emerged as key leaders of the effort, but Group of 7 nations, Australia, the European Union as well as the Arab nations of Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, have been coordinating and trying to massage both sides to achieve an agreement.

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
NEW YORK — The United States, France and several Arab nations were among the countries that on Wednesday jointly called for a 21-day cease-fire deal to avert a wider conflict between Israel and Hezbollah in Lebanon.

The diplomatic push for a temporary halt in fighting comes as Israel’s military chief told soldiers to prepare for a possible ground incursion into Lebanon .

Biden administration officials, briefing reporters under ground rules of anonymity, said they expected that the Israeli and Lebanese governments would accept the deal “in the coming hours.” The cease-fire deal is the product of days of frantic diplomacy at the United Nations, with many key leaders gathered in New York for the annual general assembly, which has coincided with Israel’s intensified campaign against Hezbollah targets in Lebanon.

Hundreds have been killed , according to Lebanon’s Health Ministry, as Israel unleashed a wave of airstrikes and turned electronic devices into bombs.

The Biden administration and the French government emerged as key leaders of the effort, but Group of 7 nations, Australia, the European Union as well as the Arab nations of Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, have been coordinating and trying to massage both sides to achieve an agreement.

In a separate joint statement Wednesday, President Joe Biden and President Emmanuel Macron of France called for broad endorsement of a deal to “give diplomacy a chance.” “It is time for a settlement on the Israel-Lebanon border that ensures safety and security to enable civilians to return to their homes,” they said.

“The exchange of fire since October 7th, and in particular over the past two weeks, threatens a much broader conflict, and harm to civilians.” Speaking to reporters Wednesday, Biden said the United States was able to generate “significant support from Europe as well as the Arab nations” for the proposed cease-fire deal.

“It’s important the war does not widen,” he added.

“War is not inevitable,” French Foreign Minister Jean-Noël Barrot told the 15-member United Nations Security Council on Wednesday.

“A diplomatic solution is indeed possible.” Lebanese Prime Minister Najib Mikati told the council: “France stood by our side in the darkest circumstances, the best proof being the efforts France is making today in collaboration with the United States in order to issue a joint communiqué that enjoys international support and which would put an end to this dirty war.” The signatories of the agreement would not directly include Hezbollah, raising the possibility that it could be shaky, and the U.S.

officials did not immediately explain why they were optimistic about the militant and political group’s involvement.

But they said that they expected that if the Lebanese government agrees to the deal, it will be able to bring along the group.

The United States does not speak directly to Hezbollah, which it has designated a terrorist organization .

The goal during the cease-fire is to reach a comprehensive agreement “that allows for residents to return to their homes in both Lebanon and Israel,” a senior administration official said.

“It’s been an all-out effort by the administration to reach this moment,” the official said, expressing gratitude “to both the Israelis and the Lebanese government.” The White House has tasked adviser Amos Hochstein to be the main negotiator on the Israel-Lebanon situation, and he has spent much of his time in the region over the past year on resolving the fighting with Hezbollah.

Secretary of State Antony Blinken has also taken a leading role in shuttling among European and Arab diplomats to try to build support for the deal, and got his Qatari and Saudi counterparts to sign on to it on Wednesday.

Blinken and Hochstein also met Lebanese Prime Minister Mikati to sound him out about the proposal, a U.S.

official familiar with the situation said, speaking on condition of anonymity to discuss the sensitive closed-door meetings.

Hezbollah has consistently said it would stop firing rockets into Israel once Israel ended its military campaign in Gaza.

The U.S.

call for a short-term cease-fire in Lebanon is the latest indication that Washington does not see a Gaza hostage-release cease-fire deal happening imminently and is embracing Israel’s preference to prioritize a cease-fire in Lebanon first.

The Biden administration has said it is focused on unlinking the first phase of a cease-fire in Lebanon from a deal between Israel and Hamas , which remains deadlocked .

But senior officials on Wednesday evening said they hoped discussions over a longer-term agreement in Lebanon could also renew negotiations in Gaza.

Hamas leader Yahya Sinwar has sought a broader conflict, one U.S.

official said, and depriving him of that possibility may eventually lead him to be more willing to accept a deal that would swap hostages for Palestinian prisoners in Israeli prisons.

An Israeli official, speaking on the condition of anonymity to discuss a sensitive military matter, told reporters Wednesday that Israel is open to a “diplomatic solution” with Hezbollah that allows Israeli forces to continue their military campaign in Gaza.

“Israel has increased military pressure on Hezbollah to delink the two fronts,” said the official, referring to the simultaneous military campaigns in Gaza and Lebanon.

“Israel is not seeking war but is also not deterred by it.” The official added that “Hezbollah has given [Hamas leader Yahya] Sinwar control over Lebanese civilians by linking the fronts.” The Israeli government is hoping that its bombardment of Lebanon, which has dealt a significant blow to Hezbollah’s command and control capabilities and Radwan forces, will convince the group to agree to a cease-fire.

But whether Hezbollah can back down and maintain its credibility after Israel’s brazen pager and walkie-talkie attacks, as well as extensive airstrikes, remains to be seen.

Israeli residents who have fled Hezbollah rockets in the northern part of the country are unlikely to return to their homes until there are clearer guarantees that they can remain there safely, leading to the need for a full agreement, a U.S.

official said.

“It was always going to have to be more than just a cease-fire, because it would be unacceptable for Israeli residents to return to their homes in the north if there weren’t security arrangements on the Lebanese side that prevented Hezbollah from sitting on the border and ensuring that they were secure from an October 7th-like attack in the future,” the official said.

Barrot, the French foreign minister, said he is heading to Beirut this week to continue to work on the proposed deal.

“We are counting on both parties to accept it without delay, in order to protect civilian populations and allow for diplomatic negotiations to begin,” he told the U.N.

gathering.

In an address earlier Wednesday, U.N.

Secretary General António Guterres urged both sides to “step back from the brink” and avoid a war that would “surely be an all-out catastrophe.” Pannett reported from Wellington, New Zealand.

Karen DeYoung, Yasmeen Abutaleb and Frances Vinall contributed to this report.

</CONTENT>
