<TITLE>Rebels and government battle in Syria; Lebanon ceasefire fraying</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2024-12-03</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2024/12/03/israel-hamas-war-news-lebanon-syria-aleppo/</URL>
<AUTHOR>Annabelle Timsit, Kareem Fahim, Niha Masih, Abbie Cheeseman, Leo Sands, Suzan Haidamous, Susannah George</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
Syria's civil war is escalating, with rebel forces (Hayat Tahrir al-Sham) claiming advances around Hama, while government forces and Russian forces counterattack.
-  Elsewhere in Syria, Kurdish-led Syrian Democratic Forces captured villages in Deir ez-Zor.
-  The fighting comes after the Lebanese ceasefire frayed due to Israeli strikes on Lebanon, and Hezbollah rocket fire toward Israel.
-  Israel's Defense Minister warned that a complete collapse of the ceasefire would result in a harsher response.
-  The humanitarian situation in Gaza continues to deteriorate, with calls for increased aid.
-  The article also reports on U.S.
- military actions in Syria and Israeli deaths in the conflict.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- Neither agency distinguishes between civilians and combatants.
- Israel estimates that about 1,200 people were killed in Hamas’s Oct.
- 7, 2023, attack, including more than 300 soldiers.
- It says 380 soldiers have been killed in its military operation in Gaza and at least 77 in its war with Hezbollah.

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
Rebel and government forces are battling for control of Syria, with the fiercest fighting on Tuesday taking place around the central city of Hama, after years of little movement in the conflict.

Islamist rebel group Hayat Tahrir al-Sham on Tuesday announced the “liberation” of three towns north of the city and said their “forces continue to advance.” Government forces, the group claimed, had suffered “major and successive collapses.” The Syrian state news agency countered that the army was reinforcing defenses north of Hama “in preparation for the start of the counterattack.” Russian forces also announced airstrikes against rebels in Hama and Idlib provinces, killing dozens.

A scramble for territory is also happening in other parts of Syria.

The Syrian Democratic Forces, a Kurdish-led group supported by the United States, said Tuesday that it has captured seven villages from the government in the eastern countryside of Deir al-Zour.

The group said it was “safeguarding” the populations in those villages from threats, including from Islamic State militants.

The renewed fighting in Syria erupted after Iran and Hezbollah, key allies of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, were distracted and weakened by Israel’s invasion of southern Lebanon.

The ceasefire in Lebanon, meanwhile, has come under strain.

Israel’s military said it struck “terror targets” in Lebanon on Monday evening, killing at least 11, according to Lebanese authorities.

Earlier, Hezbollah fired rockets toward Israel — attacks the militant group said it carried out as a warning over earlier violations of the ceasefire by Israel.

On Tuesday, Israeli Defense Minister Israel Katz said that if the ceasefire were to collapse, Israel would no longer differentiate between Hezbollah and Lebanon in its response and would “enforce the agreement with full force and zero tolerance.” Fighting also continues in Gaza, where the humanitarian situation is deteriorating.

The foreign ministers of Britain, France and Germany jointly called on Israel to open more Gaza border crossings and ramp up aid.

“The situation in Gaza is catastrophic.

Gazans​ are in desperate need of food, and shelter with the onset of winter,” British Development Minister Anneliese Dodds said in a separate statement .

Here are other key developments Recent U.S.

strikes in Syria are “completely unrelated” to the rebel advance, Maj.

Gen.

Patrick Ryder, a Pentagon spokesman, said Monday.

U.S.

forces conducted a “self-defense strike” against forces preparing to attack a U.S.

base in northeastern Syria on Friday, Ryder said.

About 900 U.S.

troops are stationed in Syria.

They have been targeted by Iranian-backed groups following Israel’s ground operation in Gaza.

The Israel Defense Forces confirmed that an Israeli American believed until now to have been held hostage in Gaza is dead.

Omer Neutra, 21, a tank commander and leader of an Israeli army outpost near Gaza, was killed on Oct.

7, 2023, in Hamas’s surprise attack on Israel, the IDF said on Monday, citing intelligence.

At least 44,502 people have been killed in Gaza during the war and 105,454 injured, according to the Gaza Health Ministry .

At least 3,961 people had been killed and 16,520 injured in Lebanon as of Oct.

26, its Health Ministry said .

Neither agency distinguishes between civilians and combatants.

Israel estimates that about 1,200 people were killed in Hamas’s Oct.

7, 2023, attack, including more than 300 soldiers.

It says 380 soldiers have been killed in its military operation in Gaza and at least 77 in its war with Hezbollah.

</CONTENT>
