<TITLE>Tucker Carlson has weird ideas on the role of spanking in democracy</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2024-10-24</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.washingtonpost.com/style/power/2024/10/24/tucker-carlson-donald-trump-spanking-america/</URL>
<AUTHOR>Monica Hesse</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
Tucker Carlson, speaking at a Turning Point USA rally, used a disturbing analogy comparing political opponents to a disobedient teenager needing a "vigorous spanking" if Donald Trump returned to the White House.
-  He framed this as a disciplinary action.
-  The article criticizes Carlson's rhetoric, noting the comparison to a father disciplining a child.
-  The piece contrasts this with a recent Kamala Harris ad highlighting a Texas woman who suffered a miscarriage due to restrictions on abortion access.
-  The article juxtaposes the two events to underscore the contrast between Carlson's political commentary and the real-life struggles of women facing restrictions on healthcare.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- On Wednesday night, speaking to an arena of fans at a Turning Point USA rally in Georgia, Tucker Carlson reached into a metaphor bag of nightmares and announced that if daddy Donald Trump returned to the White House, he would give — Kamala Harris ? The Democrats? The country? — a “vigorous spanking.” Trump’s opponents, you see, are much like a “hormone-addled 15-year-old girl [who] like, slams the door to her bedroom.” She needs discipline.
- “There has to be a point at which Dad comes home,” Carlson said to rapturous applause.

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
On Wednesday night, speaking to an arena of fans at a Turning Point USA rally in Georgia, Tucker Carlson reached into a metaphor bag of nightmares and announced that if daddy Donald Trump returned to the White House, he would give — Kamala Harris ? The Democrats? The country? — a “vigorous spanking.” Trump’s opponents, you see, are much like a “hormone-addled 15-year-old girl [who] like, slams the door to her bedroom.” She needs discipline.

“There has to be a point at which Dad comes home,” Carlson said to rapturous applause.

“Yeah, that’s right.” And when Trump came home, Carlson continued, he would tell his daughter, “You’ve been a bad girl.

You’ve been a bad little girl and you’re getting a vigorous spanking, right now.” God, I love a good piece of literary symmetry.

So thank you, Tucker, for delivering unto us the same kind of October rhetorical environment where we found ourselves eight years ago, when the “Access Hollywood” tape broke a few weeks before Election Day.

From grabbing we were born, to spanking we shall return.

Let’s see, what else? There is no subtext left to unpack.

Nobody is misspeaking, nobody is misunderstanding.

Carlson presumably wrote his remarks with care and intention, then stood in that arena in front of God and country — a stage upon which Trump himself appeared Wednesday — and declared that what petulant girls need is a 78-year-old man to whack their fannies.

And then the audience, primed to agree with so much bizarre crap at this point that you wonder whether they even so much as arched an eyebrow, seemed to agree with this, too.

Yes! Spank her! Just once I would like to turn on the television this week and not encounter Donald Trump or one of his surrogates alluding to private parts.

But no.

There was Trump in Pennsylvania, honoring the late golfer Arnold Palmer by repeatedly implying that he had a really large endowment.

“When he took showers with the other pros, they came out of there, they said, ‘Oh, my God, that’s unbelievable,’” Trump informed his audience.

A few days before that, he’d told a conservative podcast host that he “was so amazed that Harvey Weinstein got schlonged” — as in, prosecuted and shamed.

(Trump in the past has insisted that he doesn’t associate “schlonged” with genitalia , but some of us remember middle school.) Former Fox News host Tucker Carlson compared former president Donald Trump to an angry dad who would discipline those he deemed disobedient at a Georgia rally.

(Video: The Washington Post, Photo: Photo by ERIK S LESSER/EPA-EFE/Shutterstock/The Washington Post) What a fitting finale for the Gender Election.

In the exact same minute that someone texted me a link to Carlson’s speech, I was watching a new Kamala Harris ad on television featuring a Texas woman named Ondrea who, 16 weeks into a much longed-for pregnancy, suffered a miscarriage that turned into an infection.

According to the ad, doctors at her Texas hospital, hamstrung by the state’s post- Roe abortion ban, would not perform the medical procedure that would have ended her misery.

The photos of Ondrea’s abdomen, shown on screen, are some of the most gruesome, enraging images I have ever seen.

She nearly died.

She may never be able to get pregnant again.

Is all of this what Carlson had in mind when he additionally told his audience, “‘And no, [the spanking is] not going to hurt me more than it hurts you,’” Tucker added.

“‘No, it’s not.

I’m not going to lie.

It’s going to hurt you a lot more than it hurts me.

And you earned this.

You’re getting a vigorous spanking because you’ve been a bad girl, and it has to be this way’”? Are we getting closer to the vision Trump articulated when he told American women that under his presidency, they would be “happy, healthy, confident and free”? And also, “You will be protected, and I will be your protector”? Are we in paradise yet? And finally, there’s this: Even if we are able to ignore the squicky-sounding daddy kink of Carlson’s comments, it’s impossible to ignore the squicky authoritarian kink.

The Donald Trump as Presidad fantasy has had a chokehold on the conservative electorate since Trump’s 2016 campaign.

“He’s the father figure I always wanted,” a hairstylist was quoted as saying in a piece my colleague Dan Zak wrote about America’s collective daddy issues.

“I feel like he’s protecting me.” But we live in a democracy, where we get to choose our leaders every four years — and families are not democracies.

The dad you get is the dad you have for life.

You can hope you get a good one, who listens to your opinion, who lets you decorate your room as you please or quit piano lessons.

But even if you don’t, at the end of the day it’s dad’s house, dad’s rules.

And if dad thinks his daughter gets out of line, dad gets to give her a vigorous spanking.

That’s not the dynamic you want in a democracy.

It’s really not even a dynamic you want in a family.

</CONTENT>
