<TITLE>The life of a journalist in India: Doxed, stalked, criminally charged</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2024-12-10</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2024/12/10/india-press-freedom-journalist-doxxing/</URL>
<AUTHOR>Rana Ayyub</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
Rana Ayyub, an Indian journalist, faced severe online harassment and threats, including doxing, deepfake pornographic images, and death threats.
-  The harassment campaign, allegedly orchestrated by supporters of the Indian government, followed her critical reporting on the government.
-  She's also been charged with criminal offenses like money laundering, tax evasion, and spreading communal disharmony.
-  These charges and the associated legal battles have significantly impacted her personal and professional life.
-  Government officials reportedly harassed and followed her during a reporting trip to Manipur, highlighting the intimidation tactics used against journalists who criticize the government.
- Ayyub's experience is illustrative of the growing trend of government-sponsored intimidation of independent journalists in India.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- One tweet displayed an AI-generated deepfake porn image of me.
- I was not surprised to see that the handle — The Blitz — is followed by the prime minister of India.
- So is the account that first revealed my phone number, Hindutva Knight.
- Indian journalists who refuse to toe the government line have increasingly been targeted by the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and the right-wing Hindu supremacists who support it.
- India, regarded as the world’s largest democracy, has fallen to No.

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
Journalists should never become the story, but at 1:20 a.m.

on Nov.

8, I did.

That’s when my niece woke me up.

“Something is wrong,” she said as she handed my phone to me.

It felt like an avalanche had hit.

Video calls, voice calls, text messages, data calls, WhatsApp messages poured in.

There were password requests and one-time verification codes from home loan companies, banks, matrimonial websites, porn website registration requests, online shopping sites and real estate projects.

Messages and voicemails ranged from sexually explicit to death threats.

Each time I disconnected a voice call, another WhatsApp video call would pop up.

I had been doxed.

This was just the beginning.

In the following days my email password, my passport scan, my address, my visas were all shared online.

One tweet displayed an AI-generated deepfake porn image of me.

I was not surprised to see that the handle — The Blitz — is followed by the prime minister of India.

So is the account that first revealed my phone number, Hindutva Knight.

Indian journalists who refuse to toe the government line have increasingly been targeted by the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and the right-wing Hindu supremacists who support it.

India, regarded as the world’s largest democracy, has fallen to No.

159 out of 180 in the World Press Freedom Index by Reporters Without Borders, which published a report on my cyber harassment Nov.

27.

And in a 2019 study that addressed press freedom around the globe, Freedom House took note of allegations that the Indian government “issues directives on how the press should cover [Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s] activities and intimidates journalists who push back.” Bingo: “ Intimidates journalists who push back.” Doxing is merely the latest tool deployed against me.

As a Muslim in a Hindu-dominated country, with an openly Hindu nationalist government, I have been charged in five different criminal cases, accused of money laundering, tax evasion, being anti-India, spreading communal disharmony and defaming a Hindu nationalist organization.

Each time the doorbell rings, I wonder if it’s the postman with the mail or a cop with a warrant.

I spend more time in courtrooms than I do chasing stories.

In October, while I was abroad, the police showed up at the doorstep of the apartment I live in with my family in Mumbai with an arrest warrant for me.

It was for nonappearance in court, although my lawyer had not missed a single appearance.

This caused considerable distress to my brother, who was at home (the case is ongoing).

In another case, I had to put up the apartment in which my family lives as a surety bond.

The government’s suspicion of me was abundantly clear during a reporting trip I took to the border state of Manipur two months ago.

I had gone there to report on a conflict between Indigenous ethnic groups that has taken hundreds of lives in the past year and driven thousands of families into refugee camps.

Everywhere I went, government agents followed me closely — even to the restroom.

On the flight to Manipur, the man sitting next to me asked me if I was going there for a reporting trip.

He then added that he was a state government official.

I stopped answering his questions, and held my bag close for fear of something being planted in it.

At a roadside stall on the highway where I had stopped to have tea with my driver, two men appeared, sat at the table next to us and later followed the car to its destination.

An administrator I met at one of the relief camps told me that intelligence agents had alerted him about my arrival.

My driver, too, got a call from his company’s owner telling him that the police had visited the office to check on the car’s coordinates.

This surveillance forced me to cancel a number of interviews that I had lined up with people from the warring factions in Manipur.

I felt I would have been putting my sources in danger.

I was unable to do my job.

On arrival at the airport on the way home, I snatched the phone from an official who was recording me covertly.

His badge said “state intelligence.” “Sir, why are you recording me?” I asked him.

The officer said “sorry” and walked away.

All this made me wonder: With so much manpower deployed to shadow one journalist, what is the government trying to hide? After I was doxed, I spent about 11 hours at the police station, giving details of the calls, the messages, the obnoxious images, the rape and death threats to me and my family.

As I made my complaint, the calls and texts continued to drop on my phone.

One had a photo of my 7-year-old nephew, whose image was morphed with that of Osama bin Laden.

There were photos of my nieces.

Meanwhile, the fact-checking website Alt News published an investigation of the man who doxed me and continued to post abusive language about me on X.

It turns out he helped run the social media campaign of the BJP.

Even after that story was published, Hindutva Knight kept spreading misinformation.

He posted a doctored tweet on his timeline that said, under my name and photo, “I hate India and I hate Indians.” He posted other tweets that said I hate Hindus.

He posted a years-old video of me with my lawyers but said it was a video of me being arrested.

Another X user posted the AI-generated porn image of me and wrote in Hindi, “They don’t just become investigative journalists overnight, they need to sleep with a ton of men to be where they are.” (In response to my complaint about this, X replied that the post had not “broken our safety policies.”) I kept sending all this material to the police.

The cops told me investigations take time.

They said they had summoned a few of the people who had called me at 3 a.m.

but let them off after finding they were “17-year-old innocent young boys” who didn’t know whom they were calling.

Officers said they were still trying to figure out the IP addresses of the main culprits.

One other result: A lawyer who calls herself “a proud Hindu” filed a complaint against me claiming that I am spreading anti-Hindu hatred.

“Ms.

Ayyub’s posts show a disturbing pattern of disrespect toward Hindu beliefs and the institutions that protect our nation,” she wrote.

As evidence, she cited the doctored tweets.

(In my country, allegations of anti-Hindu speech can be dangerous.

In 2017, a journalist friend, Gauri Lankesh, who had criticized the Hindu nationalism espoused by the Modi government, was shot dead outside her home in Bangalore.) Over the years, I have been made acutely aware that the multiple identities I wear put me at risk as a journalist in India: an outspoken woman, a critic of the government and a Muslim.

I speak the same language as other journalists in India but my words are weaponized against me because of my religion.

My journalism is not viewed through the same lens of objectivity as the work of my fellow non-Muslim journalists because I am presumed to be disloyal to my country by virtue of my faith.

My critics assert that my goal is to discredit India on an international platform.

They are mistaken.

My goal is to hold the people in power to account and to make India a better democracy.

If, that is, I can do my job.

</CONTENT>
