<TITLE>Texas education board supports Bible-based lessons in elementary schools</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2024-11-19</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.washingtonpost.com/education/2024/11/19/texas-schools-bible-curriculum/?pwapi_token=eyJ0eXAiOiJKV1QiLCJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiJ9.eyJyZWFzb24iOiJnaWZ0IiwibmJmIjoxNzMyMjUxNjAwLCJpc3MiOiJzdWJzY3JpcHRpb25zIiwiZXhwIjoxNzMzNjMzOTk5LCJpYXQiOjE3MzIyNTE2MDAsImp0aSI6ImVlMjJlYTBmLWQzOGMtNGQ1Ny05YWNmLTczMzc1NmExOTRjMCIsInVybCI6Imh0dHBzOi8vd3d3Lndhc2hpbmd0b25wb3N0LmNvbS9lZHVjYXRpb24vMjAyNC8xMS8xOS90ZXhhcy1zY2hvb2xzLWJpYmxlLWN1cnJpY3VsdW0vIn0.g4as098mlz4vPTfi6JXTVLfcd7Pxi97vmY4fR38QRG4&itid=gfta</URL>
<AUTHOR>Praveena Somasundaram</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
The Texas education board voted 8-7 to approve a proposed elementary school curriculum incorporating Bible-based lessons, a move that has drawn opposition from some groups.
-  Governor Abbott supports the curriculum, arguing it connects history, religion, and pivotal events.
-  The curriculum is optional for school districts and could be implemented starting August 2025.
-  Critics express concern about the curriculum's potential to promote Christianity over other faiths, especially a lesson explaining the Golden Rule using Jesus as the source, while only briefly mentioning other religions.
-  Other GOP-led states, like Oklahoma and Louisiana, have also initiated similar efforts to incorporate Bible teachings into public schools, creating similar controversies.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- The remaining eight Republicans voted to keep it for approval.
- Ben Brasch contributed to this report.

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
Texas education officials on Tuesday voted to support an optional elementary school curriculum that would include lessons based on the Bible, which opponents say unfairly promotes Christian beliefs in public schools.

In a preliminary move, the state education board voted 8-7 to move forward with approving the curriculum, according to three education and advocacy groups tracking the vote.

The Texas Education Agency proposed the lessons this year after Gov.

Greg Abbott (R) signed a bill requiring the department to create a statewide curriculum for school districts to use after approval from the state education board.

Abbott publicly supported the curriculum when it was released in May, saying its materials would allow Texas students to “better understand the connection of history, art, community, literature, and religion on pivotal events like the signing of the U.S.

Constitution, the Civil Rights Movement, and the American Revolution.” The education board’s preliminary vote had been pushed a day after hours of public testimony about the curriculum at a meeting on Monday.

The 15 board members, four Democrats and 11 Republicans who all voted Tuesday, are set to take a final vote Friday.

If the curriculum is approved, districts can decide whether to adopt the curriculum starting in August 2025.

Districts that use it are eligible for an incentive of $60 per student.

The decision from Texas education officials comes as other GOP-led states, including Oklahoma and Louisiana , have moved to incorporate teachings from the Bible in public schools.

In June, Oklahoma’s state superintendent mandated public schools to teach the Bible.

Last week, the superintendent announced the creation of a new Office of Religious Liberty and Patriotism within the state’s Education Department.

The superintendent’s announcement said the new office was aligned with President-elect Donald Trump’s efforts to protect prayer in public schools.

Louisiana is currently litigating a state law requiring public school classrooms to display the Ten Commandments, a move Texas lawmakers have pushed for as well.

In Texas, the education board’s vote to keep the Bible-based lessons in the possible new curriculum followed months of contention over the issue.

After the first version of the curriculum was released in May, some parents, teachers and education advocacy groups expressed concern that some of the lessons would bring religious concepts into schools unnecessarily and center Christianity over other faiths.

Among the lessons that elicited concern was one meant to teach the Golden Rule to kindergartners.

The lesson explains that Jesus taught the rule during his Sermon on the Mount, and it notes that the Jewish Torah, written before the sermon was given, includes “many of the same rules.” Although the lesson briefly references variations of the Golden Rule from Islam, Sikhism, Hinduism and Buddhism, it does not offer further detail.

In a statement, Mary Elizabeth Castle, a spokesperson for the nonprofit Texas Values, which supports the curriculum, said the education board protected the First Amendment rights of students with its vote Tuesday.

“The Bible has had a colossal impact on the Western world in art, history, and literature that cannot be ignored,” Castle’s statement said.

“Banning the Bible in the classroom would not just deny students their liberty but also take away an opportunity for a well-rounded education.” In a statement Tuesday, the Texas American Federation of Teachers — a union representing more than 60,000 school employees in the state — condemned the state board’s decision to move forward with the curriculum, writing that the materials “violate the separation of church and state.” “Biblical content in English texts is just the opening salvo to what we can expect if we don’t find a way to halt the spread of this influence in our schools,” the group said.

“We can anticipate what will come next, whether that’s the erasure of contributions of marginalized populations in social studies or the minimalization of climate change in science.” The Texas state education board initially had planned to vote Monday on whether to keep the curriculum, from Bluebonnet Learning, on its list of educational materials for approval.

But more than 150 people signed up to give public comments on the topic, delaying the vote.

Over more than seven hours of public testimony, some parents and teachers said they opposed the curriculum’s emphasis on religious teachings.

Others said they supported the Bluebonnet Learning materials because they thought introducing students to biblical concepts early on would prepare them to better understand texts that reference the Bible throughout their education.

All of the board’s four Democratic members, as well as three Republicans, voted to remove the curriculum from its list to approve later in the week.

The remaining eight Republicans voted to keep it for approval.

Ben Brasch contributed to this report.

</CONTENT>
