<TITLE>FBI says bomb threats, swatting incidents targeted Trump picks</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2024-11-27</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.washingtonpost.com/national-security/2024/11/27/trump-cabinet-picks-swatting-bomb-threats/</URL>
<AUTHOR>Mark Berman, Justine McDaniel, Hannah Knowles</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
The FBI is investigating numerous bomb threats and swatting incidents targeting potential Trump cabinet members.
-  Several individuals, including Elise Stefanik and Lee Zeldin, reported receiving threats to their homes.
-  Specific threats included bomb threats and pipe bomb threats.
-  The Trump transition team acknowledged the threats and expressed gratitude for law enforcement's response.
-  The White House condemned the threats and stated they are monitoring the situation.
-  Swatting, the practice of falsely reporting a crime, is a dangerous tactic that endangers both victims and law enforcement, and has previously targeted politicians and schools.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- Trump’s transition team declined to provide more information when contacted by The Washington Post on Wednesday, but spokeswoman Karoline Leavitt said the incoming president appreciated the law enforcement response.
- “President Trump and the entire Transition team are grateful for their swift action,” Leavitt said in a statement.
- The White House said President Joe Biden and his administration “unequivocally condemn threats of political violence.” A spokesperson said the White House was monitoring the situation and was in touch with federal law enforcement and Trump’s team.
- “Swatting” refers to incidents in which false reports of serious crimes or dangerous situations are sent to police, prompting heavy law enforcement responses that could endanger people who are at those locations.
- These incidents have happened repeatedly in recent years, targeting schools and public officials across the political spectrum.

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
The FBI said Wednesday that “numerous bomb threats and swatting incidents” had targeted people President-elect Donald Trump has selected for Cabinet roles and other positions in his incoming administration.

Trump’s transition team said that “several” of his picks for prominent positions had faced “threats to their lives and those who live with them” on Tuesday night and Wednesday morning.

The transition team’s statement did not identify how many people appear to have been targeted or name them, and law enforcement officials have not said publicly whether they believe any of the threats were credible.

Six of Trump’s selections said they had received threats to their homes, including Rep.

Elise Stefanik (R-New York), whom Trump has tapped for U.S.

ambassador to the United Nations, and former congressman Lee Zeldin (R-New York), the president-elect’s choice for Environmental Protection Agency administrator.

Others saying they had received threats included Brooke Rollins, whom Trump plans to nominate to lead the Agriculture Department; Scott Turner, his selection to run the Department of Housing and Urban Development; Rep.

Lori Chavez-DeRemer (R-Oregon), his choice for labor secretary ; and Pete Hegseth, his pick to lead the Defense Department.

Turner said his “home was targeted by a bomb threat,” while Chavez-DeRemer reported that she and her family were “targeted with a pipe bomb threat at our Oregon home.” Hegseth said a police officer arrived at his home “where our seven children were still sleeping” to inform the family about a bomb threat directed at them.

Trump’s transition team declined to provide more information when contacted by The Washington Post on Wednesday, but spokeswoman Karoline Leavitt said the incoming president appreciated the law enforcement response.

“President Trump and the entire Transition team are grateful for their swift action,” Leavitt said in a statement.

The White House said President Joe Biden and his administration “unequivocally condemn threats of political violence.” A spokesperson said the White House was monitoring the situation and was in touch with federal law enforcement and Trump’s team.

“Swatting” refers to incidents in which false reports of serious crimes or dangerous situations are sent to police, prompting heavy law enforcement responses that could endanger people who are at those locations.

These incidents have happened repeatedly in recent years, targeting schools and public officials across the political spectrum.

Prosecutors have said swatting calls also endanger responding officers, and such calls have led in some cases to injuries or deaths .

This summer, two European men were indicted and accused of repeatedly “swatting” the homes of members of Congress, lawmakers and law enforcement officials.

Another threat was reported in northern Florida.

The Okaloosa County Sheriff’s Office said in an emailed statement that it had been notified about “a bomb threat referencing former Congressman Matt Gaetz’s supposed mailbox” at a home in the Niceville area Wednesday around 9 a.m.

Gaetz, a Republican, was Trump’s initial choice for attorney general, before he withdrew last week .

The sheriff’s office said Gaetz does not actually live at the address but that one of his relatives does.

The mailbox was checked and no devices were found, the sheriff’s office said.

Knowles reported from West Palm Beach, Florida.

Lori Rozsa in West Palm Beach and Maegan Vasquez in Washington contributed to this report.

</CONTENT>
