<TITLE>China unveils new futuristic fighter jets in surprise flyby</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2024-12-27</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.washingtonpost.com/national-security/2024/12/27/china-sixth-generation-fighter-jet-flight/?utm_campaign=wp_post_most&amp;utm_medium=email&amp;utm_source=newsletter&amp;carta-url=https%3A%2F%2Fs2.washingtonpost.com%2Fcar-ln-tr%2F4024f4e%2F67702855f94fff50e9d7e9e5%2F5d8911c29bbc0f783cea7b83%2F20%2F45%2F67702855f94fff50e9d7e9e5</URL>
<AUTHOR>Cate Cadell</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
China unveiled what analysts suspect are new sixth-generation fighter jets in a low-altitude flyby, raising concerns about China's military advancements.
-  Images and videos circulating on Chinese social media show two tailless, stealthy aircraft, one larger than the other.
-  This demonstration is unusual for its public nature and timing, possibly intended to influence debate about future fighter jet programs in the United States, including the controversial Next-Generation Air Dominance (NGAD) project.
-  The display follows criticism from Elon Musk regarding the U.S.'s F-35 program.
-  Analysts suggest China might be anticipating a shift towards unmanned drone defense by the U.S.
- to counter its own advanced jet development.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- Videos of the jets were trending on Friday on Weibo, a Chinese social media site similar to X, though their origin is unclear, and The Washington Post was unable to verify authenticity.
- In one video, the large fighter appears to be flanked by the fifth-generation J-20, China’s current top operational fighter jet.
- The testing of two new advanced aircraft in broad daylight is also highly unusual, analysts say, and could indicate Beijing is putting on a purposeful show of force.
- It comes amid uncertainty about the future of the United States’ own sixth-generation fighter initiative — known as the Next-Generation Air Dominance (NGAD) Program .
- Projected costs for each of the future U.S.
- aircraft are estimated to reach hundreds of millions of dollars, and the Air Force in November decided to defer key decisions about the project’s direction to the incoming Trump administration.

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
Images of advanced aircraft cruising at low altitudes in China on Thursday have surprised analysts, who say they could mark the maiden flights of sixth-generation fighter jets, representing a major breakthrough for the country’s military.

Photos and videos originating on Chinese social media platforms and reposted to X on Thursday show large triangular aircraft making sweeping slow turns at a very low altitude.

The images appear to show two different aircraft, one smaller than the other — both featuring a tailless, stealthy design suggesting they rely on advanced computational technology to be piloted.

Videos of the jets were trending on Friday on Weibo, a Chinese social media site similar to X, though their origin is unclear, and The Washington Post was unable to verify authenticity.

In one video, the large fighter appears to be flanked by the fifth-generation J-20, China’s current top operational fighter jet.

The testing of two new advanced aircraft in broad daylight is also highly unusual, analysts say, and could indicate Beijing is putting on a purposeful show of force.

It comes amid uncertainty about the future of the United States’ own sixth-generation fighter initiative — known as the Next-Generation Air Dominance (NGAD) Program .

Projected costs for each of the future U.S.

aircraft are estimated to reach hundreds of millions of dollars, and the Air Force in November decided to defer key decisions about the project’s direction to the incoming Trump administration.

The Chinese display of new military technology also follows criticism from Elon Musk — whom President-elect Donald Trump has tasked with advising on budget cuts — regarding the F-35 fifth-generation fighter jet program, which has been saddled with faulty technology and cost overruns .

Musk called the F-35 builders, Lockheed Martin, “idiots” and suggested that manned fighter jets should be replaced with drones.

“It seems quite intentional that [the Chinese military] wanted us to see this aircraft flying.

I would think personally that the timing on this is really curious because they’re aware of this debate and it almost seems designed to influence that debate,” said Kelly Grieco, a senior fellow at the Stimson Center.

Amid uncertainty over the manned fighter project, Pentagon officials have said they want to create an unmanned “hellscape” of drones to defend Taiwan.

“[China] might be more worried about the United States Air Force going in that direction,” said Grieco.

China's sixth-generation fighter jet reportedly conducted its first flight, according to visuals shared on Chinese social media.

pic.twitter.com/ta8hKFnNax — International Defence Analysis (@Defence_IDA) December 26, 2024 
 The Pentagon did not respond to a request for comment on the apparent test flights.

China’s Defense Ministry and state media published no details of the flights — which Chinese netizens pointed out coincided with Mao Zedong’s birthday.

There is no set pattern in how Beijing unveils new military breakthroughs, though often it is on dates that mark national anniversaries.

The maiden flight of the J-20 in 2011 coincided with a visit by then-U.S.

Defense Secretary Robert Gates to Beijing, and it was widely viewed as an effort by Beijing to signal its military might.

Domestic Chinese media reported that the test flights took place around 4 p.m.

on Thursday at the Huangtianba Airbase near Chengdu, home to the airfields of Chengdu Aircraft Corporation — a subsidiary of a state-owned aircraft conglomerate tasked with designing and manufacturing some of the country’s most advanced combat aircraft, including the J-20.

It has long been known that Beijing — along with the United States and other major powers — is pursuing what is broadly referred to as sixth-generation fighter capabilities.

These encompass a range of potential breakthroughs, including AI-driven autonomy, hypersonic speed, advanced electronic warfare systems and next-level stealth technology — all of which could give Beijing an edge in a potential conflict around Taiwan or the South China Sea.

The initial images of the new aircraft provide no concrete evidence of such capabilities.

However, analysts note that the designs hint at a significant leap forward from the country’s fifth-generation fighters, including the Chengdu J-20, which has undergone several major upgrades over the past decade.

It’s not clear from the images whether either of the test aircraft would be a successor to that model.

The J-20 is designed as a long-range stealth fighter and has featured prominently in increasingly aggressive drills circling the self-governed island of Taiwan.

China has also produced a smaller fifth-generation stealth aircraft called the J-35, which has yet to be used in major drills but is expected to be deployed for shorter-range carrier-based operations in the coming years.

A maiden test flight of a sixth-generation aircraft would underscore the rapid pace of China’s ambitious efforts to modernize its military.

In an annual report to Congress released this month, the Pentagon noted that Beijing is quickly closing the gap with the United States in advanced airpower , making significant strides in unmanned aircraft and increasing the proportion of advanced fighter jets in its ranks.

Wider production of a sixth-generation Chinese jet could still be many years off.

The fifth-generation J-20 only began mass production around 2017, according to Chinese media reports.

The Pentagon estimates that the majority of China’s fighters — around 1,300 of a total 1,900 — are fourth-generation planes.

China is pressing ahead with its goal of building a “world-class military” by the middle of the century, aiming to match or surpass the United States despite recent setbacks.

A sweeping anti-corruption crackdown has ensnared key military units over the past 18 months, including the disappearance of two top defense ministers.

The campaign initially targeted the PLA Rocket Force, which oversees the country’s strategic missile systems, but has since widened.

This week, two more generals were removed from key positions, overseeing critical aspects of China’s military strategy in the army and the South China Sea navy.

</CONTENT>
