<TITLE>In ‘The Message,’ Ta-Nehisi Coates writes about the stories that fuel bigotry</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2024-10-05</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.washingtonpost.com/books/2024/10/05/message-ta-nehisi-coates-review/</URL>
<AUTHOR>Becca Rothfeld</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
Ta-Nehisi Coates's new essay collection, "The Message," is generating significant controversy, with critics misinterpreting its focus on the relationship between aesthetics and politics.
-  The book, ostensibly a letter to Coates's writing students, is not solely about Palestinians, but explores the author's fascination with literature.
-  Critics, like Tony Dokoupil and Coleman Hughes, have mischaracterized Coates's position on the Middle East and the book in general.
-  While the author acknowledges the flaws in some of his own writing, he emphasizes the beauty of language and literature, even in works by figures with problematic pasts like Ezra Pound and Thomas Jefferson.
-  The article concludes by arguing that "The Message" should be assessed as a piece of writing, not through the lens of political controversy.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- But where books about Israelis and Palestinians are concerned, you could certainly do worse than “The Message”: There are any number of books that brush aside the displacement and mass murder of Palestinians as an afterthought.
- But you could also do much better: You could read a more comprehensive history, such as Rashid Khalidi’s “The Hundred Years’ War on Palestine,” or a work of detailed reporting, such as Nathan Thrall’s “A Day in the Life of Abed Salama.” “The Message” is not, after all, primarily a book about Israel, nor a work of fact-finding journalism.
- It does not unearth new information or paint much of a portrait of the places Coates visits.
- It is an aesthetic treatise and a compilation of personal reflections, an inward-looking book that has been aggressively mischaracterized as something more polemical — and perhaps a touch more exciting.
- In his review of “The Message,” the New Yorker writer Jay Caspian Kang questions Coates’s reverence for literature.

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
On the one hand, there is Ta-Nehisi Coates the writer, journalist, political thinker and occasionally adventurous stylist; on the other, there is Ta-Nehisi Coates the public figure, a punching bag for conservatives in search of progressives to flatten into symbols.

Anyone ensorcelled by the media fanfare around Coates’s latest, a slender essay collection called “ The Message ,” could be forgiven for assuming that it is a book exclusively about the plight of Palestinians.

Last week on “CBS Mornings,” Tony Dokoupil accused Coates of extremism and violated the unspoken decree that talk show hosts must confine themselves to polite banter, subjecting his guest to a veritable interrogation in defense of Israel; in the Free Press, a publication that loudly congratulates itself on its open-mindedness while running a continual string of predictable polemics against something imprecisely called “wokeness,” the writer Coleman Hughes scoffed that Coates’s “desire to smear America has been eclipsed by his desire to smear Israel.” Apparently, Hughes’s desire to smear Coates has eclipsed his commitment to basic literacy.

The hysterical responses “The Message” has elicited are obscene, and not only because of their willfully reductive misinterpretation of Coates’s eminently reasonable position on the Middle East.

(“There’s nothing that offends me about a Jewish state.

I am offended by the idea of states built on ethnocracy,” Coates told Dokoupil.

This is hardly an extremist position.) More broadly, the book’s vitriolic detractors are representatives of a demeaned approach to literary criticism.

The mid-century critic Lionel Trilling wrote that reactionaries perform “irritable mental gestures which seek to resemble ideas”: This is too generous a description to apply to Dokoupil and Hughes, who perform an activity that barely even resembles reading.

In their haste to peg Coates as the face of a movement, they are intent on doing anything and everything but attending to the actual book he has written.

But we are — or should be — in the business of registering the words on the page, not feeding the hype machine.

“The Message” is framed as a letter to Coates’s writing students at Howard University, and it is not a monograph about the Palestinians but a meditation on the relationship between aesthetics and politics, as well as a kind of travelogue.

Much of it consists of an autobiographical account of how Coates came to be enchanted by literature as an art form.

“I was haunted,” he writes of his childhood encounters with books, “by a style, by language.” Patently, this is a book that asks to be evaluated as a piece of writing, and I will pay it the homage of holding it to the standard it sets for itself.

In its guise as an aesthetic effort, it is not entirely successful; not because it is “extremist,” but for less dramatic and more banal reasons: It is disjointed, heavy-handed and frequently clichéd.

If Coates is not always the virtuosic stylist his admirers make him out to be, he is certainly not the vicious zealot his critics caricature.

For one thing, he does not believe that all writing exists in the service of politics.

On the contrary, he is emphatic that he can see the beauty in Ezra Pound’s poetry despite Pound’s fascist sympathies.

In the lines written by this profoundly flawed artist, Coates explains, he nonetheless “saw something in the shape and rhythm of words, and that something was transcendent and universal.” He continues, “Even today, you can find me admiring Thomas Jefferson’s elucidations on the evils of enslavement, all of them underwritten by those very evils themselves.” The central thesis of “The Message” is far more interesting than the by-now tired and implausible claim that writing can be beautiful only insofar as it is politically virtuous or efficacious.

Coates maintains not that a piece of writing must succeed politically to succeed aesthetically, but the reverse — that a piece of writing can succeed politically only to the extent that it succeeds aesthetically.

There are several reasons this might be so.

For one thing, Coates argues, “the arts tell us what is possible and what is not, because, among other things, they tell us who is human and who is not.” To write as Frederick Douglass wrote, for instance, is necessarily “to imagine the enslaved, the colonized, the conquered as human beings.” Second, if racism, sexism and other systems of oppression are grounded in myths of hierarchy, then writing can combat bigotry by contesting “the stories that sought to inscribe [bigotry] as natural.” White supremacy is, of course, a material assemblage — a system of laws and resources — but it is also rooted in a “syllabus,” a “corpus,” a “canon.” Anti-racist and anti-sexist efforts involve an imaginative struggle as much as a concrete one.

Finally, good writing requires its authors to exhibit curiosity and to reject facile romanticism by looking the world squarely in the face.

As Coates notes, it is tempting to turn the narratives of bigotry on their heads without altering their structure.

Partisans of the “vindicationist tradition” (a phrase he attributes to the 20th-century historian St.

Clair Drake), he writes, seek to “reclaim the very history weaponized against them and turn it back against their tormentors” — to write an alternative history in which they “were born not to be slaves but to be royalty.” Yet he warns his students against the tendency to reinforce “the myth of utopic African origin”: “I am trying to urge you toward something new — not simply against their myths of conquest, but against the urge to craft your own.” Coates himself provides a moving example of the lure of vindicationism in the best essay in “The Message,” “On Pharaohs.” When he traveled to Dakar, Senegal, he recounts, he “resolved to see the reality of this home that I did not know.” Yet he found himself unexpectedly seduced by the idea of Dakar as “an origin point for black America,” which “is itself a story, an invention.” Even though he knew that Gorée, an island off the coast of Senegal, was only a “mythical site of departure” and not the actual place from which many enslaved people were kidnapped, he could not hold back tears when he paid it a visit.

In the book’s third and longest essay, he argues that Israelis have recently fallen prey to the same sort of thinking, with horrific results.

(“The Message” was written before Oct.

7, 2023, and Israel’s bloody reprisal in Gaza but still during the reign of the brutally nationalist and proto-authoritarian Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu.) They, too, he says, have constructed a false past — one designed to excuse and justify crimes in the present.

Coates understands all too well why a people whom many have tried to exile from the domain of the human would take solace in assimilation.

“In the immediate postwar years,” he writes, “the place of Jews in the tent of whiteness was still uncertain.” (It remains uncertain in much of the world and feels, at least to me, increasingly uncertain even in America, where neo-Nazis swarmed to support Donald Trump in 2016 and one of the Jan.

6 rioters wore a sweatshirt that read “Camp Auschwitz.”) It is no wonder that heirs to the Holocaust are desperate to establish themselves as members of a “pristine and orderly West”; so much so that some of them have stooped to contrasting their culture with that of “a barbaric Palestine plagued by filth and chaos.” Yet the results are indefensible, never more so than in the past year.

Anti-Arab racism has a long history in Israel, and Coates witnessed the country’s increasingly “two-tier” legal system in action when he met with displaced residents of the West Bank and wandered into a park named after Meir Kahane, a “Jewish supremacist” who “promoted the permanent annexation of the West Bank and Gaza and the enslavement of Palestinians.” So Coates does dedicate an essay to the predicament of the Palestinian people, a choice that requires a great deal of bravery in a climate in which critics of Israel are routinely denounced as antisemitic (and in which Coates himself has been lambasted for venturing to suggest that Netanyahu’s ethnocracy is inconsistent with the basic tenets of liberal democracy).

But where books about Israelis and Palestinians are concerned, you could certainly do worse than “The Message”: There are any number of books that brush aside the displacement and mass murder of Palestinians as an afterthought.

But you could also do much better: You could read a more comprehensive history, such as Rashid Khalidi’s “The Hundred Years’ War on Palestine,” or a work of detailed reporting, such as Nathan Thrall’s “A Day in the Life of Abed Salama.” “The Message” is not, after all, primarily a book about Israel, nor a work of fact-finding journalism.

It does not unearth new information or paint much of a portrait of the places Coates visits.

It is an aesthetic treatise and a compilation of personal reflections, an inward-looking book that has been aggressively mischaracterized as something more polemical — and perhaps a touch more exciting.

In his review of “The Message,” the New Yorker writer Jay Caspian Kang questions Coates’s reverence for literature.

Our job as writers is not to set out to change the course of history, Kang insists.

“Our job is to type.” I admire Kang, but I do not share his cynicism about our shared profession.

The best part about Coates’s book is its adamant faith in the almost talismanic authority of the written word.

Indeed, as Coates realized when he visited a town in South Carolina where conservative factions sought to ban one of his books from public schools, the reactionary panic about “critical race theory” functions as an implicit admission of the power of literature to ignite us.

But if Coates is right — if writing can be a means of revising our imaginative repertoires — then the success of his book hinges on its success as a piece of art.

A radically novel world cannot rise from the rubble of a hackneyed language.

“The Message” is frustratingly abstract, full of personal revelations and grand pronouncements without much in the way of concrete (or especially stylish) observation.

Few of its arguments are unfamiliar, and it is full of platitudes that do not shock but dull: “The only way I ultimately survived was through stories”; “I am thinking of the young writers everywhere whose task is nothing less than doing their part to save the world”; “You wonder if human depravity has any bottom at all, and if it does not, what hope is there for any of us?” I agree with Coates that the obligation to write beautifully is a moral one.

But this is an obligation that is impossibly difficult for even the best of us to fulfill.

Becca Rothfeld is the nonfiction book critic for The Washington Post and the author of “All Things Are Too Small: Essays in Praise of Excess.” The Message By Ta-Nehisi Coates One World.

235 pp.

$30

</CONTENT>
