<TITLE>To oppose racism, a priest won’t lead Communion. He could be defrocked.</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2024-11-29</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.washingtonpost.com/religion/2024/11/29/episcopal-priest-communion-racism/</URL>
<AUTHOR>Marisa Iati</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
Reverend Cayce Ramey, a white Episcopal priest, has stopped leading Communion since 2021, citing a need for racial reconciliation within the church as a priority.
-  He believes the Episcopal Church has not sufficiently atoned for its history of racism, including slavery, and that he cannot participate in the Eucharist until the church makes greater strides.
-  Ramey's refusal to lead Communion has resulted in disciplinary proceedings that could lead to his defrocking.
-  He argues his "Eucharistic fast" is a necessary step in addressing institutionalized white supremacy within the church.
-  Support for Ramey's actions comes from some church members, but others are critical of his approach.
-  The Diocese of Virginia argues that a priest cannot refuse core duties, regardless of the reason.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- Harris pointed to steps the church has taken to reckon with its racial history, including electing a Black man as its presiding bishop — the chief pastor of the national church — and, in the Virginia diocese, taking a pilgrimage to slavery-related sites in the South.
- Her own presence in a leadership role is also proof that the church has made progress, she said.
- “It makes me feel I’m invisible when I hear that — that the altar of the Episcopal Church is like a lunch counter for White people.
- It ignores that I am here as a bishop,” Harris said.
- The Rev.

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
Nearly three years had passed since the Rev.

Cayce Ramey had decided to stop leading Communion services when he opened an email last spring to learn whether his choice would cost him his priesthood.

He had steeled himself for this moment, sure that the disciplinary panel would recommend he be defrocked.

But when his suspicions were confirmed, he said, he wept.

For Ramey, refusing to participate in the most important ritual of his Episcopal faith is a matter of conviction: He said racial reconciliation within the church has to take priority over Communion — also known as the Eucharist — during which Episcopalians believe Jesus is present.

“The Holy Eucharist is our most central sacred act, and it’s what Jesus teaches — I think calls — us to walk away from,” said Ramey, who is White.

“I was being called to work at that level and not to make another scholarships fund or even another reparations fund” in response to racial inequality.

Ramey’s “Eucharistic fast,” which began in 2021, was met with a range of reactions in his former faith community in Alexandria, Virginia, and in the broader Episcopal world.

Some church members, including people of color, expressed support for what they saw as him standing up for Black parishioners.

Others were befuddled — unclear what Communion has to do with racism.

Some Black Episcopalians said Ramey had not solicited enough input from them or was ignoring his duties to a church, then headed by a Black bishop, that they said has made significant strides in combating racism.

Now, Ramey is appealing to the Diocese of Virginia to let him remain a priest without presiding over celebrations of the Eucharist — at least temporarily.

If he loses his priesthood, he will be among a relatively small number of Episcopal priests to meet that fate.

To Ramey, a 48-year-old former engineer and U.S.

Marine, the conflict is about the ways he says the Episcopal Church has perpetuated white supremacy for centuries and failed to fully make amends.

A scripture passage about making offerings to God, he said, helped him realize that he was being called to “go and be reconciled” with those the church has hurt before he can participate in its central sacrament.

And he said he cannot feel personally reconciled until the broader institution has made greater strides in combating its alleged racism.

The diocese stipulates that the church has to do more to atone for its participation in racist systems, including slavery.

But it says that a priest cannot refuse to perform one of his core duties, no matter how noble the reason, and that Ramey is defying the promises he made when he joined the clergy.

The “proceedings against Dr.

Ramey center on whether or not he violated his ordination vows and are in no way related to his work in the area of racial justice,” Bishop Mark Stevenson, who declined interview requests through his staff, said in a statement .

“It is my firm belief that Episcopal priests can and must work to make our faith a living reality by providing the sacraments to their people, as well as work to secure justice and human dignity.” But to Ramey, whose former parish sits on an erstwhile plantation, the Eucharistic fast was a necessary next step after engaging with racial justice work for almost a decade.

Not only has the Episcopal Church insufficiently atoned for past wrongs, he said, but it also has not done enough to address what he calls its “institutionalized white supremacy.” “In the context of Sunday morning,” Ramey said, “we were still serving Holy Eucharist at the ‘Whites only’ lunch counter.” A visit to a slave dungeon In 2017, Ramey had an experience that would change the course of his priesthood.

As the rector of All Saints Episcopal Church — Sharon Chapel in Alexandria, he traveled to Cape Coast, Ghana, as part of a diocesan initiative seeking to undo the lingering effects of the transatlantic slave trade.

There, he toured one of the dozens of slave castles — forts where enslaved people were detained before they were brought to the Americas — that dot the country’s coast.

Standing in the castle’s Anglican chapel, directly over a slave dungeon, Ramey said he couldn’t shake the question of where Jesus was in that moment: Episcopalians believe God is with them in worship, but how could that be true here, where Africans had been held captive in a dark, barren cavern directly below the church? “I didn’t have a sufficient answer,” he said.

“And I kept asking, and I kept wondering, and I kept trying to figure it out and struggling with it.” The question followed Ramey to Virginia Union University, a historically Black institution in Richmond, where he pursued a doctor-of-ministry degree focused on the theology of the Eucharist and transatlantic slavery.

He centered his studies on a scripture passage in which Jesus tells his followers that if someone has something against them, they should reconcile with that person before worshiping.

“The more I prayed with … those verses, the more the Holy Spirit challenged me about what they meant for me,” Ramey wrote in a document filed in his disciplinary case.

“How might I embody the radical love for our neighbors embedded in those teachings?” The conclusion he eventually reached, he wrote, was to refuse to perform the ritual of Communion or receive the Eucharist himself until the church is no longer “beholden to our beliefs, practices, and, most dangerously, our theologies mired in white supremacy.” The Episcopal Church — the U.S.

branch of the Anglican Communion — and its Virginia diocese have a painful history with race.

Enslaved people helped build the state’s churches and an Alexandria-based seminary , which did not admit Black students until 1951.

Just before the Civil War, more than 80 percent of clergy in the diocese were enslavers.

African American Episcopal congregations couldn’t vote in diocesan conventions until 1861.

The church has taken steps to try to repair those wrongs, including launching anti-racism training programs, commissioning reports on racial identity in the church and committing 10 percent of its unrestricted endowment each year to a new racial justice coalition.

The Virginia diocese runs educational programs on race and in 2021 pledged to create a $10 million reparations fund for people of color.

None of it is enough for Ramey, who began his Eucharistic fast in June 2021, continuing to officiate and preach at Sunday services but stepping aside so that another priest could lead the Eucharist.

All Saints and three other parishes were worshiping together at the time, and their priests shared responsibility for services.

All the while, Ramey served on a committee that pressed diocesan officials to fund reparations for Black Americans and eventually persuaded them to commit $10 million.

He also worked with a genealogist and others at his parish to identify descendants of people once enslaved on the property as the congregation explores reparations to them.

The Communion fast seemed to be going fine at first.

But within months, Ramey would get an inkling that conflict might be ahead.

Concern from the diocese Now-retired Bishop Susan Goff, who was then leading the diocese, had started to worry about Ramey.

She was fine with him not receiving the Eucharist, she told him in January 2022, but she disagreed with him not giving it to others.

“The sacrament is not your gift — it is Jesus’ gift,” she wrote, according to a copy of the note in Ramey’s disciplinary record.

Goff did not respond to an interview request, and representatives of the diocese declined to make her available.

Ramey was undeterred by Goff’s concern.

That May, he invited members of All Saints — a small and diverse congregation — and its sister parishes to a meeting to publicly acknowledge and explain his fast for the first time.

Parishioners and others in the diocese who heard about the situation expressed a range of emotions.

Davette Himes, an African American member of All Saints who said her ancestors were enslaved, compared Ramey’s fast to National Football League players kneeling during the national anthem to protest police brutality.

“To have real empathy and to pattern your life and your way of being, it’s almost prophetic in a way,” said Himes, 59.

“And we don’t know what to do with that because it’s so rare.” Another African American Episcopalian in Northern Virginia, who spoke on the condition of anonymity for fear of backlash from the diocese, said he accepts that Episcopal leaders may consider refusing to lead — or celebrate — the Eucharist to be unacceptable.

But he said he also appreciates that Ramey is advocating on behalf of people of color.

“I understand boycotting and demonstrating for what you believe,” he said.

Barbara Gay, who attends a sister parish of All Saints, had practical concerns.

In October 2022, she wrote to fellow parishioners to express worry that there might not be enough priests to keep distributing Communion at all weekly services.

The issue was resolved by hiring outside priests on a temporary basis.

But nearly a year later, Gay said she still felt Ramey had been dismissive of his parishioners’ spiritual needs.

“He’s kind of rejecting the central core role of the priest, which is to be a conduit or to help us access God,” Gay, 72, told The Washington Post.

Around the time that Gay wrote to other parishioners, Goff told Ramey that she had received complaints about his Eucharistic fast, case documents show.

She warned him that she might initiate proceedings under Title IV of the Episcopal Church’s Constitution and Canons — the section that governs discipline.

“I did not give you permission to cease celebrating the Eucharist,” Goff told Ramey, according to her notes from the phone call.

“I do not have the authority to give you permission to violate your ordination vows or the canons.” Less than four weeks later, the diocese opened a disciplinary case against him.

‘My people’s pain is being used’ The next 16 months brought a flurry of negotiations as Ramey and the diocese sought to resolve the dispute.

But the diocese stood firm in its position that Ramey could not refuse to perform a core function of his job, and Ramey continued to insist that he was not violating his ordination vows.

“Rather than contradict my vows, this fast has finally shown me a way to fulfill them,” he wrote in a July 2023 case document.

He later told The Post that he believes the diocese is misinterpreting his vow to lead the Eucharist and wrongly ignoring other parts of the vows that he says his fast supports, such as patterning his life to proclaim the Gospel.

By that July, Ramey was gone from All Saints.

He had resigned the previous December in what he said was a long-considered decision mostly unrelated to his fast.

But his disciplinary case continued, and this past March it went to a hearing.

Amid testimony from both sides, the diocese put on the stand two high-ranking African American members of the clergy who said that their ancestors were enslaved and that they strongly disapproved of Ramey’s choice.

“I am insulted and offended that the pain of my people has become a petard, a platform, for someone to deny the Eucharist, the sacramental ministry that we are given as priests,” testified the Rev.

Gayle Harris, an assistant bishop in the Diocese of Virginia.

“I feel like my people’s pain is being used,” she added.

Harris pointed to steps the church has taken to reckon with its racial history, including electing a Black man as its presiding bishop — the chief pastor of the national church — and, in the Virginia diocese, taking a pilgrimage to slavery-related sites in the South.

Her own presence in a leadership role is also proof that the church has made progress, she said.

“It makes me feel I’m invisible when I hear that — that the altar of the Episcopal Church is like a lunch counter for White people.

It ignores that I am here as a bishop,” Harris said.

The Rev.

Wendell Gibbs Jr., a retired bishop of the Diocese of Michigan, argued that Ramey was acting out of “self-aggrandizement” — an attempt to assuage his guilt about his own racism.

“I believe that this man is stealing from me and other descendants of slaves,” Gibbs testified.

“I don’t see his indignation as righteous indignation but quite typical of White elitism.” Jim Taylor, the chief equity officer at a nonprofit and a lay leader at All Saints while Ramey was the rector, disagreed.

He testified that as a person of color, he appreciated that Ramey was addressing the issue of racism in the church through the eyes of racial minorities.

“I know other people of color who do the kind of work I do, I know that we find it often refreshing when a White person stands up and calls other White people to accountability on issues that White people have created,” Taylor said.

“And that’s what Cayce, in my eyes, is doing.” When Ramey took the stand, his attorney asked him when, specifically, his fast will end.

Ramey’s response was vague.

He said when White people ask him that question, they really want to know how much they’ll have to sacrifice for the cause of racial justice.

Later, he told The Post that the people wronged by the church’s racial injustice should play a role in deciding when his fast should end.

He said he has asked for input from Black Episcopalians he knows from All Saints, Virginia Union University and the Church of the Holy Comforter, a historically Black Episcopal parish in Washington, where he interned as a seminarian.

But on a deeper level, Ramey said, the endpoint of his fast is not up to humans at all.

“Like every fast in our religious tradition — in our Christian tradition — it’s led by God and inspired by the Holy Spirit when it will end,” he said.

The Rev.

Kim Coleman, national president of the Union of Black Episcopalians, said that to her knowledge, Ramey had not consulted her group about his Eucharistic fast.

Refusing to lead Communion, she said, is “inconsistent” with the deep significance the Black church has historically placed on that sacrament.

Coleman added that if Ramey’s fast is meant in the spirit of Black civil rights, he should accept the result, just as Black Americans historically have had to bear the consequences of their civil disobedience.

More importantly, Coleman said, she hopes Ramey will listen to how Black Episcopalians think he can help combat racism and then follow their lead.

“Let the people of color drive the train,” she said.

Priesthood in limbo In May, the outcome of the disciplinary proceedings became clear: The hearing panel, acting as a jury of sorts, had recommended that Ramey be defrocked over his refusal to lead Communion.

“Only an ordained priest can perform this sacrament,” the panel wrote in announcing its decision.

“In a very real sense then, a priest who refuses to celebrate Holy Eucharist, in theory as much as in practice, has chosen to cease to be ‘a priest.’” Ramey, who is on administrative leave from the diocese, formally challenged the ruling in September.

The appeal is ongoing.

If Ramey is deposed, he won’t be able to function as a priest.

That means no longer leading Sunday worship, hearing confessions or administering the sacraments — and effectively being treated as a layperson.

The possibility is heartbreaking, Ramey said.

The preliminary hearing alone made him feel like his community was telling him that he no longer belonged to them.

But Ramey said that in his ordination vows, he promised to be an example to others of living in accordance with Jesus’ teachings.

“What example am I providing if I’m willing to celebrate Holy Eucharist at an altar that we set up on plantation land, on top of the bodies and blood of people enslaved on that land?” he said, referencing the location of All Saints and other churches that sit on former plantations.

Protests such as Ramey’s have been key to forcing change in the Episcopal Church, said the Rev.

Kelly Brown Douglas, former dean and president of Episcopal Divinity School in New York City.

Bishops ordained 11 women to the priesthood in 1974, in defiance of church policy.

In 2007, five priests in Massachusetts refused to officiate weddings until the church allowed them to perform same-sex marriages.

Douglas, an expert on racial reconciliation, said the church’s mission is rooted in the Gospel, not in the institution’s rules.

“When those doctrines and canons get in the way of us reflecting the beloved community, reflecting the community that God calls us to, then nothing’s wrong with the future,” she said.

“Something’s wrong with the doctrines and canons.” Ramey’s disciplinary case has taken up most of his attention for the past two years as he continues to engage in racial justice work.

He said attorney’s fees in the case have cost him about $50,000, which he has paid from his wife’s income and family savings because he has not earned his own income since leaving All Saints.

Ramey said he assumes some believe he’s trying to be a “White savior,” but he insists that isn’t his goal.

The Episcopal Church was simply not moving fast enough to address the ways racial injustice is woven into its foundation, he said, and he felt led to respond with his fast.

“I took this step,” he said, “because I thought I was called by God to do so.”

</CONTENT>
