<TITLE>Gaza didn’t get enough winter shelters. Now babies are dying in the cold.</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2025-01-06</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2025/01/06/gaza-babies-winter-deaths-isarel-war/</URL>
<AUTHOR>Claire Parker, Hajar Harb, Heba Farouk Mahfouz</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
Seven infants in Gaza have died from malnutrition and hypothermia in recent weeks, due to a lack of adequate winter shelters and aid.
-  Displacement from Israel's war against Hamas has left many vulnerable, living in overcrowded tents along the coast.
-  Aid organizations warned of potential winter flooding and a need for shelter materials, blankets, and warm clothes.
-  However, Israeli restrictions on aid convoys and looting of humanitarian trucks prevented critical supplies from reaching those in need.
-  The Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) acknowledged the reports as "sad" but claimed a lack of verified information regarding the deaths.
-  The UN Children's agency called the deaths preventable and warned of further potential child deaths due to the harsh conditions.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- But ongoing Israeli restrictions on aid convoys and the looting of humanitarian trucks meant critical supplies never reached hundreds of thousands of vulnerable people before temperatures plunged last month, aid groups and doctors say.
- Continued Israeli bombardment and restrictions on movement kept many of the displaced confined to the coast.
- Asked at a briefing last week about the infants’ deaths, Lt.
- Col.
- Nadav Shoshani, international spokesman for the Israel Defense Forces, called the reports “sad” but said the military had “not been able to find anyone who’s not Hamas-related to give us verified information about the cause and the reason.” Israel says it is working to facilitate the delivery of winter supplies, in addition to other aid, yet the amount of relief entering the enclave is still a fraction of what humanitarian groups on the ground say is required.
- Edouard Beigbeder, regional director for the U.N.
- children’s agency, called the recent deaths “preventable.” “With temperatures expected to drop further in the coming days, it is tragically foreseeable that more children’s lives will be lost to the inhumane conditions they are enduring, which offer no protection from the cold,” he said in a statement on Dec.
- 26, after four infants had died of hypothermia.
- A week later, three more children were dead, according to their relatives and Gaza medical workers.

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
JERUSALEM — When Aisha al-Qassas came into the world on Nov.

28, the odds were already stacked against her.

Israel’s war against Hamas in Gaza had twice displaced her parents and four older brothers, now living in a squalid, overcrowded encampment along the coast.

Home was a tent strung together from threadbare pieces of cloth, and winter was just beginning.

Deprived of nutritious food, Aisha’s mother struggled to breastfeed.

Still, when the father, Adnan al-Qassas, took the baby to a nearby hospital on Dec.

19 for a checkup, Aisha — whose Arabic name means “alive” — was underweight but otherwise healthy, Adnan recalled.

Aisha al-Qassas died Dec.

20 at 3 weeks old in Khan Younis, Gaza, of malnutrition and hypothermia, according to her family and doctors.

(Video: Adnan Al-Qassas) Temperatures plummeted that night.

Aisha was dead by morning, her body “turned into a piece of ice,” Adnan said.

He carried her to Nasser Hospital in Khan Younis, where a forensic specialist told him she had succumbed to a combination of malnutrition and exposure to extreme cold.

Aisha is one of at least seven infants in Gaza who have died in the cold in recent weeks, according to relatives, doctors and the enclave’s Health Ministry, as more than a million displaced people — many sick and malnourished — struggle to find refuge from the elements.

For months, aid organizations warned that parts of Gaza were prone to winter flooding and that significant quantities of shelter materials, flood-response equipment, blankets and warm clothes were needed to stave off a public health catastrophe.

The Biden administration sent a letter to Israeli officials in October demanding that Israel “surge all forms of humanitarian assistance throughout Gaza” ahead of winter and allow the displaced to move inland.

But ongoing Israeli restrictions on aid convoys and the looting of humanitarian trucks meant critical supplies never reached hundreds of thousands of vulnerable people before temperatures plunged last month, aid groups and doctors say.

Continued Israeli bombardment and restrictions on movement kept many of the displaced confined to the coast.

Asked at a briefing last week about the infants’ deaths, Lt.

Col.

Nadav Shoshani, international spokesman for the Israel Defense Forces, called the reports “sad” but said the military had “not been able to find anyone who’s not Hamas-related to give us verified information about the cause and the reason.” Israel says it is working to facilitate the delivery of winter supplies, in addition to other aid, yet the amount of relief entering the enclave is still a fraction of what humanitarian groups on the ground say is required.

Edouard Beigbeder, regional director for the U.N.

children’s agency, called the recent deaths “preventable.” “With temperatures expected to drop further in the coming days, it is tragically foreseeable that more children’s lives will be lost to the inhumane conditions they are enduring, which offer no protection from the cold,” he said in a statement on Dec.

26, after four infants had died of hypothermia.

A week later, three more children were dead, according to their relatives and Gaza medical workers.

Infants are particularly susceptible to health complications in cold weather, according to John Kahler, a pediatrician and co-founder of the U.S.-based health nonprofit MedGlobal.

They have less fat to insulate them and a large body surface area relative to their weight, which increases heat loss.

They haven’t yet developed the ability to generate heat by shivering.

Contact with cold surfaces, prolonged exposure to cold environments and moisture from wet clothing increase newborns’ vulnerability to hypothermia — which can lead to metabolic failure, organ damage and death.

“When they are in a concrete house, when the electricity is available, when warming is available, [infants] can’t tolerate hypothermia,” said Ahmed al-Faraa, a pediatrician at Nasser Hospital in southern Gaza, where five infants, including Aisha, have been brought dead on arrival because of the cold.

“So what can we expect when they are in a tent without any source of diesel or electricity or gasoline or even fire to warm them?” Hypothermia can exacerbate existing infections or illnesses, so it’s often difficult to pinpoint the exact cause of death, said Amande Bazerolle, emergency coordinator in Gaza for Doctors Without Borders.

But the infant deaths are “something that’s happening now and not before,” she said.

Yahya al-Batran, 42, couldn’t afford clothes and blankets to warm his newborn twin sons, Juma and Ali, in their tent on the beach in Deir al-Balah.

He watched as their bodies began to tremble and their lips turned blue.

On Dec.

29, Batran said he rushed Juma to al-Aqsa Martyrs Hospital — but it was too late.

U.S.

emergency physician Mimi Syed, who spent December in Gaza on a medical mission, said she saw 4-week-old Juma being brought in dead from septic shock linked to hypothermia.

Ali was admitted soon afterward and remains on a ventilator in the intensive care unit, his father said.

Israel’s invasion of Rafah in May, which it said was aimed at dismantling Hamas’s last battalions in the south, drove hundreds of thousands of people toward parts of central Gaza that were already crowded with the displaced.

Intense Israeli bombardment and military evacuation orders directed people toward a “humanitarian zone” that Israel had designated at al-Mawasi, a narrow strip of land along the coast, and in parts of Deir al-Balah, farther north.

Families pitched makeshift tents there, crowded together in unsanitary conditions without basic infrastructure.

Most of the families have been displaced multiple times, often under fire — leaving them little time to pack up blankets, shoes and winter clothes.

In recent weeks, temperatures have dropped to between 41 and 50 degrees at night, Bazerolle said.

Children without shoes or winter clothes wander streets filled with open sewage, according to Rachael Cummings, Save the Children’s humanitarian response leader in Gaza.

Heavy rains last week flooded more than 1,500 tents, according to Gaza’s civil defense, which said on Dec.

30 that hundreds of people had called to plead for urgent support.

But the need is too overwhelming; some families who lost their tents to a rainstorm in November told The Washington Post that they are still without shelter.

Flooding at a beach in Khan Younis, Gaza, in November destroyed tents where displaced Palestinians were sheltering.

(Video: Suleiman Makdad) Last January, when Kahler treated children in Rafah during a medical mission, many infants were brought in sick, he said, “but there weren’t freezing deaths.” “This winter’s catastrophe is a direct result of the continued denial of humanitarian aid,” he added.

Humanitarian groups were able to meet only 23 percent of Gaza’s shelter needs this fall, according to the Norwegian Refugee Council, a charity that leads coordination efforts among aid organizations.

More than 900,000 people need shelter assistance, the group said in news release last month.

Half a million people live in flood-prone areas, according to Oxfam International .

“Across Gaza, aid deliveries continue to be blocked, deliberately hampered and targeted by Israel’s military,” the charity said in a news release last month.

COGAT, the Israeli military body that liaises with humanitarian groups, has been “helping bring in equipment for the winter in Gaza,” said Shoshani, the IDF spokesman.

The military is working “to make sure we bring the best conditions to Gaza that we can do during this difficult and complex war,” he added, accusing the United Nations of failing to distribute aid to those in need.

Few crossing points into Gaza are open to aid groups and, once inside, their convoys are often forced to take dangerous routes through Israeli-controlled areas patrolled by criminal gangs.

Israeli forces also frequently deny requests by aid groups to deliver relief across the enclave.

Israel has taken some measures to ease the flow of humanitarian aid in recent months, including the opening of another border crossing and the approval of at least one additional route for use by aid groups inside Gaza.

The volume of aid entering the enclave ticked up from an all-time low in October.

Still, 76 trucks of supplies entered Gaza per day on average in December, according to U.N.

data — less than a sixth of the daily prewar figure.

Gaza is also gripped by a hunger crisis, and aid workers say they have been forced to prioritize food over shelter materials; between Dec.

1 and 26, only 24 trucks carrying shelter items reached central and southern Gaza, according to the U.N.

Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.

Meanwhile, children sick with upper respiratory infections fueled by the cold are pouring into Doctors Without Borders’ Gaza field hospital, Bazerolle said; Nasser Hospital is receiving five to 10 cases of children presenting with symptoms of hypothermia every day, pediatrician Faraa said.

Without a ceasefire, a surge of aid and more medical evacuations abroad, “there will be thousands more deaths,” said Syed, the American emergency physician.

Early on Dec.

25, Mahmoud al-Fasih and his wife woke to feed their 22-day-old baby, Sila.

“I was warming the water and I wanted to play with her to wake her up to feed,” Fasih said.

“I looked at her and she was blue.

She was so stiff, like a piece of wood.” The cold had caused Sila’s heart to stop, Faraa told the distraught father at the hospital.

“It is unfair we lose her like this,” Fasih said.

“If I were living in a house, dignified, my daughter would not have gone through this.” On New Year’s Eve, rain flooded the grieving family’s tent and soaked Fasih, his wife and their surviving children, ages 3 and 4.

“Now I am scared for my other children,” the father said.

Harb reported from London and Mahfouz from Cairo.

Miriam Berger in Jaffa, Israel, and Lior Soroka in Tel Aviv contributed to this report.

correction A previous version of this article incorrectly said that recent temperatures in the Gaza Strip had dropped to between 23 and 50 degrees at night.

They have dropped to between 41 and 50 degrees.

The article has been corrected.

</CONTENT>
