<TITLE>How many hostages are in Gaza? Tracking those who remain after the ceasefire</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2025-01-13</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/interactive/hamas-hostages-israel-war-gaza/</URL>
<AUTHOR>Victoria Bisset, Júlia Ledur, Leslie Shapiro</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
The Washington Post article tracks the ongoing hostage situation in Gaza.
-  Currently, 60 hostages remain, although Israel hasn't fully disclosed the basis for that estimate.
-  A total of 117 hostages have been released or rescued, including 78 in a prisoner exchange and 27 others outside that deal.
-  Additionally, eight were freed in military operations.
-  The article notes that 74 hostages have been confirmed killed, and an additional 34 are reported killed, but their bodies haven't been recovered.
-  The conflict in Gaza began with the October 7, 2023 attack and has resulted in the deaths of over 46,000 people.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- The United States pushed for a broader deal that could also encompass the release of men and military personnel, but negotiations broke down and hostilities resumed on Dec.
- 1, 2023 — and there has been little progress toward a deal since.
- As the war goes on, Israel has continued to announce the deaths of hostages — some who it confirmed during forensic and other investigations were killed in the Oct.
- 7 attack and their bodies taken into Gaza, and others who it says were killed by militants during captivity.
- Israel has said at least three hostages were killed in its own operations and said that it was “highly likely” that at least three others were killed “as a result of a byproduct of an IDF airstrike” in late 2023.
- Hamas has said that Israeli strikes have also killed other hostages, although The Washington Post could not independently verify this.
- While Hamas is thought to hold most of the hostages, some are believed to be held by other militant groups, including Palestinian Islamic Jihad, whose fighters also took part in the Oct.
- 7 attack.

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
60 remain hostage in Gaza They are believed to be alive, but Israel has not given the full basis for its estimates.

Hover to see more details They have been in captivity for 466 days Hover over the highlighted names to see more details Ariel Bibas Yarden Bibas Kfir Bibas Shiri Bibas Bipin Joshi Surasak Rumnao Nattapong Pinta Bannawat Saeathao Watchara Sriaoun Sathian Suwannakham Pongsak Thaenna Alon Ohel Yosef-Chaim Ohana Avinatan Or Liri Albag Itzhak Elgarat Edan Alexander Matan Angrest Karina Ariev Elkana Bohbot Ohad Ben Ami Agam Berger Rom Braslavski Gali Berman Ziv Berman Romi Gonen Daniella Gilboa Guy Gilboa-Dalal Evyatar David Emily Tehila Damari Sagui Dekel Chen Eitan Horn Iair Horn Maxim Herkin Omer Wenkert Alexander (Sasha) Trupanov Arbel Yehoud Ohad Yahalomi Eliya Cohen Nimrod Cohen Segev Kalfon Or Levy Naama Levy Oded Lifshitz Gadi Moshe Mozes Eitan Abraham Mor Omri Miran Shlomo Asad Mantzur Tamir Nimrodi Keith Samuel Siegel Tsachi Idan Matan Zangauker Ariel Cunio David Diego Cunio Bar Kupershtein Ofer Kalderon Tal Shoham Doron Steinbrecher Omer Shem Tov Eli Sharabi Ages are current age in captivity 117 have been freed or rescued A total of 78 hostages were freed in an exchange deal with Israel for Palestinian prisoners; 27 foreign and dual nationals were released outside the deal.

Israel has rescued eight hostages in military operations.

Hamas militants released four women for “humanitarian reasons.” 74 have been confirmed killed The hostage whose death was most recently confirmed by Israel is Hamza Alziadna .

There are 34 hostages reported killed whose bodies have not been recovered and remain in Gaza.

Bodies remain in Gaza Bodies recovered The cross-border attack that Hamas militants launched on Oct.

7, 2023, is regarded as the deadliest and most brutal attack in Israeli history.

Palestinian militants shot, bombed and burned their way through Israeli towns, military posts and a music festival, killing and sometimes torturing 1,200 people — including more than 300 soldiers — and taking 251 more hostage, according to the Israeli government.

In response, Israel launched a military campaign against Hamas in Gaza, in what the United Nations’ human rights agency has since described as an “unprecedented level of killing and injury of civilians.” More than 46,000 people have been killed in Gaza during the war, according to the Gaza Health Ministry, which does not distinguish between civilians and combatants.

There was brief progress in freeing the hostages last year amid mounting pressure from their families and international allies, in particular the United States.

Under an exchange deal that began on Nov.

24, 2023 , Hamas released 78 hostages in exchange for 240 Palestinian prisoners held by Israel, all of them women or teenagers; 24 foreign nationals and three Israeli-Russian dual nationals were released outside of that agreement during the same period.

Status of all 251 original hostages over time The largest hostage release happened in late November 2023 during cease-fire negotiatons.

The United States pushed for a broader deal that could also encompass the release of men and military personnel, but negotiations broke down and hostilities resumed on Dec.

1, 2023 — and there has been little progress toward a deal since.

As the war goes on, Israel has continued to announce the deaths of hostages — some who it confirmed during forensic and other investigations were killed in the Oct.

7 attack and their bodies taken into Gaza, and others who it says were killed by militants during captivity.

Israel has said at least three hostages were killed in its own operations and said that it was “highly likely” that at least three others were killed “as a result of a byproduct of an IDF airstrike” in late 2023.

Hamas has said that Israeli strikes have also killed other hostages, although The Washington Post could not independently verify this.

While Hamas is thought to hold most of the hostages, some are believed to be held by other militant groups, including Palestinian Islamic Jihad, whose fighters also took part in the Oct.

7 attack.

The number of hostages who have died in captivity and the ages, genders and nationalities of those remaining in Gaza are unclear.

Israel has indicated that the majority of those remaining have Israeli or dual citizenship and are male.

Age at time of abduction Hostages who have remained hostage been freed or rescued been killed Under 18 18-40 41-60 61-80 81+ The ages of one current hostage and 20 freed hostages are unknown.

200 of the people taken hostage were men.

51 were women.

Three American hostages are still believed to be alive in Gaza, and the bodies of four others are still being held there.

Washington is seeking an accounting of their deaths, according to the State Department.

There are six Thai citizens and one Nepali citizen still believed to be in captivity.

It’s unclear how many hostages are members of the Israeli military.

The only children on Israel’s list of remaining hostages are Kfir Bibas, 1, and his brother Ariel, 5.

Israel has said it is assessing Hamas’s claims that the Bibas children and their mother, Shiri, were killed.

Yarden Bibas, Shiri’s husband and the father of the two children, is also being held hostage in Gaza and is believed to be alive.

About this story Israel defines hostages as people who were taken on Oct.

7, 2023, into Gaza as captives whether they are alive or confirmed killed.

This article manually calculates the number of hostages still believed to be alive and in captivity by overlaying Israel’s list with government and military confirmations of those who were killed or freed.

Personal details about the hostages are from The Washington Post’s reporting and the Hostages and Missing Families Forum.

</CONTENT>
