<TITLE>The looming Eurasian menace</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2025-01-09</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2025/01/09/eurasia-iran-china-russia-north-korea-geopolitics/</URL>
<AUTHOR>Hal Brands</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
Hal Brands's article argues that the growing alliance of authoritarian powers in Eurasia poses a significant geopolitical threat.
-  He contends that the strategic importance of Eurasia, where most of the world's population and economic potential reside, makes control of the region a path to global dominance.
-  Historical parallels are drawn to World War I, World War II, and the Cold War, where similar contests for Eurasian hegemony resulted in devastating conflicts.
-  The author highlights that the US, while instrumental in preventing previous Eurasian empires, is allegedly unprepared for the current challenge.
-  Brands emphasizes that a country or coalition controlling Eurasia would pose a global threat to democracies, necessitating a strong response to prevent such a scenario.
-  He suggests that the US must lead a coalition to maintain a divided Eurasia and safeguard freedom.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- And since Oct.
- 7, 2023, Russia has provided targeting data and other assistance to the Houthis in Yemen, who have also acquired missiles and other means of mayhem from Tehran.
- Most of these relationships aren’t new, but all have grown rapidly in the hothouse global environment created by wars in Ukraine and the Middle East.
- To be sure, there is no overarching multilateral alliance — no autocrats’ NATO.
- Mistrust among the illiberal powers remains pervasive.
- But their relationships constitute a cohering network of ties among states that are determined to wreck Pax Americana and command some of the most valuable strategic real estate on Earth.

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
Hal Brands is a professor at the Johns Hopkins University School of Advanced International Studies, a senior fellow at the American Enterprise Institute and a columnist for Bloomberg Opinion.

This essay is adapted from his new book, “ The Eurasian Century: Hot Wars, Cold Wars, and the Making of the Modern World.” The most dangerous geopolitical phenomenon of our era isn’t any single crisis, conflict or competitor.

It is the growing web of ties that bind America’s Eurasian foes.

Eurasia — the supercontinent encompassing Europe, Asia and their outlying islands — is the world’s strategic center, where most of its people and economic potential reside.

An empire that ruled Eurasia could project its influence across the adjoining oceans and around the world.

All the epic clashes of the 20th century — World War I, World War II, the Cold War — were contests between autocracies seeking vast Eurasian empires and the global coalitions that fought to turn them back.

Today, a new league of authoritarian leaders is reviving this deadly pattern.

Revisionist — that is to say, violently dissatisfied — powers are locking arms and thrusting the world into the next round of the great Eurasian struggle that has shaped the modern age.

Unfortunately, the United States is not ready for the challenge.

The history of the modern era was foretold when it was just beginning.

In 1904, British scholar Halford Mackinder explained in a landmark lecture how geography, technology and ideology were combining to ignite an explosive Eurasian century.

He argued that the proliferation of railroads was shrinking Eurasia, allowing ambitious states to shuttle huge armies across the landmass.

The end of the easy colonial expansion of the 19th century was turning the great powers against one another in the 20th.

Politics and geopolitics were also interacting combustively: Tyrants now ruled modern industrial economies, which would turbo-charge repression and conquest.

All these developments, Mackinder foresaw, would lead to titanic battles.

A country or coalition that mastered Eurasia would become a global menace, for it would possess the power to make even the most distant democracies insecure.

So, aspiring conquerors would lunge for Eurasian hegemony, while offshore powers — and the vulnerable states situated along Eurasia’s edges — would fight to preserve their freedoms by keeping the supercontinent divided.

This was as good a guide as any to what followed.

In World War I, a militaristic, illiberal Germany sought to dominate Europe from the North Sea to the Caucasus, creating a resource-rich empire and a springboard to global power.

It took a transoceanic coalition anchored by Britain and the United States to beat the Germans back.

In World War II, the fascist powers racked up victories from the Atlantic coast of France to the Central Pacific.

An even grander coalition — the United States, Britain, the Soviet Union, China — was required to rescue humanity from a new dark age.

During the Cold War, a communist bloc led by Moscow dominated the heart of Eurasia and sought to press outward against a free world led by Washington.

These contests claimed tens of millions of lives, showing how aggression and atrocity could radiate outward from conquered continents.

They also demonstrated that the cycle of Eurasian conflict could be broken only by the United States.

This distant superpower helped defeat two wartime bids for Eurasian hegemony.

During the Cold War, it preserved a favorable balance within the supercontinent by erecting the alliances — NATO and several security pacts in the Western Pacific — that secured its economically dynamic flanks.

These partnerships enabled democracy to thrive and the free-world economy to flourish, and they formed the foundation upon which the liberal world order was built.

By the 1990s, the Western victory over the Soviet Union had inaugurated a post-Cold War era of great-power peace and democratic dominance.

But dreams of autocratic empire are now reviving, and a second Eurasian century has begun.

In Northeast Asia, North Korean ruler Kim Jong Un is building up his nuclear and missile arsenals in hopes of driving America from the Korean Peninsula.

In the Middle East, Iran and its proxies are fighting the United States and Israel over the region’s future .

In Europe, Russian President Vladimir Putin is waging a quasi-genocidal war to rebuild the Russian empire — with an assist from North Korean troops.

China is racing to prepare for war with Washington and making its push for primacy in the Western Pacific.

Each of these countries aims to overturn the existing order in key regions around the Eurasian periphery.

Each sees U.S.

power and liberal values as its greatest foes.

And what makes the current moment so precarious is that these aggressive powers are making common cause.

China and Russia announced their “no limits” strategic partnership just before Moscow launched its full-scale invasion of Ukraine.

They mean, in Chinese President Xi Jinping’s words, to revolutionize the international system by causing “changes the likes of which we haven’t seen for 100 years.” Since that invasion, Russia and North Korea have sealed a formal military alliance; Russia and Iran have built a stronger defense partnership in which technology, weapons and know-how flow both ways.

And since Oct.

7, 2023, Russia has provided targeting data and other assistance to the Houthis in Yemen, who have also acquired missiles and other means of mayhem from Tehran.

Most of these relationships aren’t new, but all have grown rapidly in the hothouse global environment created by wars in Ukraine and the Middle East.

To be sure, there is no overarching multilateral alliance — no autocrats’ NATO.

Mistrust among the illiberal powers remains pervasive.

But their relationships constitute a cohering network of ties among states that are determined to wreck Pax Americana and command some of the most valuable strategic real estate on Earth.

Western observers play down the autocrats’ pacts at their peril, because some of history’s greatest cataclysms have been caused by dysfunctional — yet profoundly destructive — alliances.

Nazi Germany, Fascist Italy and Imperial Japan never could have coexisted in the long run.

But before World War II, their cooperation delivered devastating multiplier effects by destabilizing governments on several fronts at once.

During the early Cold War, a wary alliance between Moscow and Beijing intensified the threats facing the free world.

And whether the new autocratic pacts are love matches or marriages of convenience, they are having serious strategic effects.

For one thing, these relationships encourage aggression by reducing its costs: A heavily sanctioned Russia has been able to continue its war in Ukraine thanks to the missiles, artillery shells, drones and troops it has received from Tehran and Pyongyang, and the economic succor it has gotten from Beijing.

Likewise, the pacts increase the danger of war on some fronts by pacifying others: Putin can go all-out against Ukraine because he faces no threat from China, just as Xi can be bolder in the Pacific because he has a friendly Russia at his back.

An autocratic peace within Eurasia encourages violent meddling around its margins.

Autocratic relationships also weaken Western pressure on individual regimes: Russia now shields Pyongyang from sanctions, while Tehran and Moscow develop illicit trade networks beyond U.S.

reach.

These relationships divide U.S.

attention by creating trouble in several places at once.

Witness Washington’s agonizing debates over aid for Ukraine vs.

support for Taiwan , over hammering the Houthis vs.

husbanding missiles for a war with China.

Perhaps most fundamentally, autocratic ties are shifting the military balance.

Beijing’s record-breaking buildup has long involved purchases of Russian planes, missiles and air defenses.

And Sino-Russian defense cooperation is only getting deeper and more secretive as the two countries work together to build submarines, helicopters and other key capabilities.

Across Eurasia, in fact, transnational production networks are emerging: Iranian-origin drones are being built in Russian defense plants, where North Korean workers reportedly labor.

The autocratic arms trade is burgeoning, as Russia promises to sell state-of-the-art aircraft, air defenses and other advanced capabilities to its partners.

Disruptive military innovation is accelerating, as North Korea receives Russian technology and know-how for its missile and satellite programs.

These countries’ militaries are also learning from one another: Iran’s missile and drone attack against Israel in April looked suspiciously similar to Russia’s previous strikes against Ukraine.

If the United States once served as the arsenal of democracy, a modern-day arsenal of autocracy is now taking shape.

Russia, Iran, China and North Korea have already managed more defense-technological collaboration than the Axis powers of the World War II era ever did.

Even if they never come together in a full-fledged military alliance, they could still deepen their cooperation in dangerous ways.

For example, they could collaborate on more sensitive projects: Russia could support North Korea’s rapidly improving nuclear program or give Beijing its most advanced submarine-quieting technology.

Putin could give the Houthis anti-ship cruise missiles to make their attacks more lethal.

Russia and China could swap insights on how to use nuclear threats to keep the United States from interfering as they coerce or attack their neighbors — precisely what Putin has done in Ukraine.

Or perhaps these countries could find more dramatic ways to cooperate in crisis or conflict.

China and Russia are already conducting military drills in potential conflict zones from the Baltic Sea to the Western Pacific, signaling that one illiberal power won’t sit on the sidelines as Washington fights another.

Russia could aid China in a future conflict against the United States by conducting cyberattacks that make it harder for America to mobilize.

Or Putin could menace Europe by posturing his forces there while the Pentagon is preoccupied with a crisis in Asia.

If any of this seems unlikely, just remember that Western observers have repeatedly been surprised, even shocked, by how far these relationships have already come.

Meanwhile, closer ties among U.S.

adversaries raise the odds that a war that starts in one place will spill into others.

Recall that World War II began not as a global conflict but as a set of regional crises that gradually intensified and became inseparable — just as the United States’ Eurasian crises are becoming sharper, and more interwoven, today.

The United States is still struggling to adapt to this situation.

Washington continues to see the world as being divided into separate regions.

This assumption is dangerously outdated.

As the Eurasian axis coheres, individual crises take on global meaning.

It might be fashionable to talk about pivoting away from Europe to focus on China.

But one reason it would be so damaging if America abandons Ukraine, and Russia defeats it, is that this would be a victory for the larger autocratic coalition in its showdown with the democratic world.

The United States also lacks the resources for this new round of rivalry.

The U.S.

military is designed to defeat only a single enemy in a major conflict.

U.S.

military spending is nearly as low, as a percentage of gross domestic product, as it has been at any time since World War II.

Its defense industrial base is in pitiful shape.

Yet as hot wars rage in the Middle East and Europe, and a Sino-American cold war intensifies in the Asia-Pacific, the United States could easily face conflicts in two or more regions simultaneously — or find itself fighting a rival that is receiving help from other adversaries.

The United States has a post-Cold War military in a pre-world war world.

It should be devoting about 5 percent of GDP to defense — significantly more than its current 3 percent.

It will also need greater cooperation within and across its own Eurasian alliances so it can exert global strength against interconnected threats.

Some of this is already happening.

Asia-Pacific powers such as Japan and South Korea have aided Ukraine because they see its war with Russia as a test of strength between the democratic world and Eurasian autocracies.

Now, Washington’s European allies need to get serious about how they would respond — with sanctions or other measures — to a Chinese attack against Taiwan, or how they might defend themselves if they were threatened by Russia while the United States is distracted in the Pacific.

U.S.

allies in Europe and Asia must also significantly boost their military spending, and deepen their defense-industrial integration, to ensure they can produce key weapons at the scale modern war demands.

Finally, America and its allies should take the fight to the enemy.

They should pursue stronger, more rigorously enforced economic and technological denial policies — such as harsher sanctions on Russian and Iranian oil exports, and tighter restraints on China’s semiconductor ecosystem — meant to hinder autocratic military innovation.

And if Washington can make one autocracy pay for the actions of others — by sanctioning Chinese banks that finance the trade that sustains Putin’s war effort, for instance — so much the better.

None of this would immediately rupture the Eurasian axis: The United States and its allies face another protracted clash for supremacy with another autocratic coalition.

But it is essential to strengthen the ramparts of an embattled international order and, eventually, help America prevail in the grand Eurasian struggle that is once more underway.

</CONTENT>
