<TITLE>China’s Xi addresses economic challenges, threatens Taiwan in New Year speech</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2025-01-01</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2025/01/01/xi-speech-china-economy-trump-taiwan/</URL>
<AUTHOR>Katrina Northrop</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
Xi Jinping's New Year's address projected confidence in China's economy despite acknowledged challenges.
-  He reiterated threats regarding Taiwan,  while facing potential new trade wars with the US, cross-strait tensions, and slowing domestic growth.
-  China's 2024 GDP is predicted to be lower than the government's 5% target, with unemployment, especially youth unemployment, and a spiraling property crisis contributing to the slowdown.
-  The government has implemented stimulus measures, including a $1.4 trillion package for local governments, but some estimates place growth at 2.4-2.8%.
-  Xi also pledged to boost consumption and incentivize childbirth to address the falling birth rate and shrinking workforce.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- From a potential new trade war with the United States to cross-strait tensions and slowing growth at home , China faces uncertainty on many fronts as it rings in the new year.
- The economy presents the most pressing issue for Chinese policymakers.
- With growth for 2024 unlikely to hit the government’s 5 percent target, China is grappling with persistent unemployment, particularly among young people, as well as a spiraling property crisis.
- In the first 11 months of last year, investment in real estate plunged by 10.4 percent from 2023, according to the National Bureau of Statistics.
- Beijing has scrambled to contain these economic woes.

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
Chinese leader Xi Jinping used his New Year’s address Tuesday evening to project confidence about the country’s economic outlook and repeat threats about taking over Taiwan, as Beijing grapples with an ailing economy and the looming inauguration of a U.S.

president set to take a hard line on China.

In the televised address , Xi acknowledged that China’s economy was facing “challenges from uncertainties in the external environment” — but he struck a defiant note, proclaiming that the country would prevail through hard work.

“We have always grown by weathering the storms and become stronger by overcoming challenges,” he said.

Xi’s bravado contrasts with a harsher reality for Beijing in 2025.

From a potential new trade war with the United States to cross-strait tensions and slowing growth at home , China faces uncertainty on many fronts as it rings in the new year.

The economy presents the most pressing issue for Chinese policymakers.

With growth for 2024 unlikely to hit the government’s 5 percent target, China is grappling with persistent unemployment, particularly among young people, as well as a spiraling property crisis.

In the first 11 months of last year, investment in real estate plunged by 10.4 percent from 2023, according to the National Bureau of Statistics.

Beijing has scrambled to contain these economic woes.

In September, China implemented several stimulus measures , including support for the property sector and a $1.4 trillion package to help local governments deal with crushing debt.

There are small signs that those moves have helped: The World Bank raised its China GDP growth forecast for 2024 last week, predicting it would hit 4.9 percent, up from its previous 4.8 percent forecast.

Some estimates put growth much lower.

An analysis released on Tuesday by the New York-based research firm Rhodium Group found that China’s gross domestic product grew 2.4 percent to 2.8 percent in 2024.

More help is on the way.

At a mid-December economic meeting of top Chinese policymakers, known as the central economic work conference, Beijing signaled its willingness to expand government spending this year and vowed to boost consumption.

The conference also pledged to incentivize people to have children, as China tries to bolster its falling birth rate and shrinking workforce.

Xi acknowledged the economic hardships faced by vulnerable groups on Tuesday.

He said in his speech — which is now an annual tradition and which Xi delivered in front of a large painting of the Great Wall — that he is “always thinking” about issues of employment and education, as well as elder and child care.

Beijing is setting up a system to identify low-income families to better direct social assistance, according to a state media announcement on Monday.

China’s leader also sought to underscore the importance of economic equality in another speech released Wednesday in Qiushi , a Communist Party magazine.

Xi drew a sharp contrast between Chinese modernization and Western economic development, which he said was “capital-centric, rather than people-centric.” “Today, many Western countries find themselves increasingly in difficulty largely because they cannot curb the greedy nature of capital,” Xi said in the speech, which was just made public after it was delivered internally in February 2023.

But some economists say much more aggressive stimulus and direct assistance to people is needed to kick-start growth and support needy populations, especially with President-elect Donald Trump promising tariff hikes on Chinese goods.

“The policy direction has been there, but then what has been somewhat lacking is the amount of money that we actually put into those policies,” said Zhu Tian, an economics professor at the China Europe International Business School in Shanghai, arguing that Beijing needs to dedicate significant resources to boosting the property sector and providing cash payments to the entire population.

Trump won’t take aim only at the United States’ trade relationship with China: The incoming administration could also herald continued tensions between the two countries over technology.

Xi’s speech highlighted China’s progress in semiconductors and artificial intelligence, as well as quantum and space technology — all of which have become flash points in a broader U.S.-China tech race as the United States has attempted to limit China’s access to certain high-tech products.

A stark reminder of tech tensions emerged Monday when the U.S.

Treasury Department disclosed that it had been hacked by a Chinese state-sponsored actor.

Some experts, however, see a potential upside for U.S.-China relations amid the changes in Washington.

“There’s a window of opportunity to improve the relationship in the first half a year or year under the Trump administration,” said Li Cheng, a political science professor at the University of Hong Kong, citing the president-elect’s lack of ideological opposition to China and a more personal approach to diplomacy.

“China wants to have a good beginning with the Trump administration.” Another possible silver lining for Beijing: As Trump has promised to pull the United States back from the world stage, China is portraying itself as a responsible global leader on issues such as climate change and international economic governance.

Xi nodded to that in his speech this week, saying China had “injected positive energy into maintaining world peace and stability” as the globe was “interwoven with chaos.” Trump’s isolationist policies could also allow China to deepen its economic ties with other nations, said Yue Su, a China economist at the Economist Intelligence Unit.

“The tariffs will not only be imposed on Chinese products, but also other countries,” she said.

“There’s going to be an opportunity for China.” Xi’s speech also touched on another geopolitical hot spot: Taiwan.

“The compatriots on both sides of the strait are one family,” he said.

“No one can sever our blood ties, and no one can stop the historical trend of the reunification of the motherland!” That echoes his remarks in 2023’s New Year’s speech, in which he said China and Taiwan would “surely be reunified.” His warning comes after the United States has increased arms sales to Taiwan and following China’s large-scale military drills in October and May around the self-governing island that Beijing claims as its own.

On the last day of 2024, China sent four coast guard vessels into the restricted waters of the Kinmen Islands, which Taiwan controls, just a few miles off the Chinese shore.

Taiwanese President Lai Ching-te gave his own New Year’s speech Wednesday morning, in which he called for “peace and stability” across the Taiwan Strait.

“Taiwan must be prepared for danger in times of peace, continue to increase its defense budget, strengthen its defense capabilities and demonstrate its determination to protect the country,” he said.

It’s unclear how Trump’s return to the Oval Office will affect the China-Taiwan relationship, given the incoming president’s contradictory track record on Taiwan policy.

As he prepared to take office for his first term, for example, Trump spoke on the phone with the then-president of Taiwan, a breach in diplomatic protocol.

But recently, he has displayed a more transactional approach to the island, including repeatedly arguing that Taiwan should be paying the United States more in return for its support.

The address isn’t the only New Year’s message Xi delivered Tuesday.

He used a New Year’s greeting to Russian leader Vladimir Putin to emphasize the countries’ close relationship.

China and Russia have always walked “hand in hand,” Xi said, and their friendship will only continue to “deepen,” according to state media .

Vic Chiang in Taipei, Taiwan, contributed to this report.

</CONTENT>
