<TITLE>Israeli cabinet to vote Friday on ceasefire, hostage release deal with Hamas</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2025-01-17</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2025/01/16/israel-war-gaza-ceasefire-hostages-news-hamas/</URL>
<AUTHOR>Frances Vinall, Niha Masih, Victoria Bisset, Gerry Shih, Susannah George, Sammy Westfall, Mikhail Klimentov, Lior Soroka, Heba Farouk Mahfouz, Hajar Harb, Loveday Morris, Claire Parker, Bryan Pietsch, Leo Sands, Abbie Cheeseman, Karen DeYoung</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
Israel's cabinet will vote Friday on a ceasefire and hostage release deal with Hamas.
-  Negotiations yielded an agreement for a 42-day ceasefire, involving Israeli troop withdrawals and aid to Gaza, plus an exchange of hostages.
-  However, Israeli far-right opposition threatens to derail the deal, potentially leading to a coalition collapse.
-  The deal faces a hurdle in the Israeli cabinet and coalition votes, despite initial agreement.
-  A senior Hamas official confirmed the agreement, and early reports indicate a release of some hostages, including Americans.
-  Casualties in Gaza continued even after the ceasefire announcement, with at least 77 deaths and over 250 wounded.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- This live coverage has ended.
- For the latest updates, please go here .
- Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has been informed by Israel’s negotiation team that agreements have been reached on a ceasefire and hostage deal with Hamas, his office said in a statement early Friday local time.
- Families of the hostages held by the militant group were also briefed on the agreements.
- Netanyahu expressed his appreciation to the team “and all those who assisted,” the office said.

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
This live coverage has ended.

For the latest updates, please go here .

Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has been informed by Israel’s negotiation team that agreements have been reached on a ceasefire and hostage deal with Hamas, his office said in a statement early Friday local time.

Families of the hostages held by the militant group were also briefed on the agreements.

Netanyahu expressed his appreciation to the team “and all those who assisted,” the office said.

The Israeli prime minister on Thursday accused Hamas of “reneging” on parts of the agreement, leading to a delay in the Israeli cabinet meeting scheduled to vote on the deal, which requires approval from both the cabinet and Israel’s coalition government.

The security cabinet is now set to meet Friday, and the government will later convene to approve the deal, Netanyahu’s office said.

But there is still opposition from the far-right partners in Netanyahu’s coalition, who reject the idea of a truce with Hamas and have threatened to topple his government.

On Thursday, Netanyahu’s far-right national security minister, Itamar Ben Gvir, warned that if the deal were approved, he and his faction would withdraw from Netanyahu’s government.

That move alone would not bring down Netanyahu’s ruling coalition, though other parties could follow Ben Gvir’s lead, according to Israeli media reports.

A senior Hamas official, speaking on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to speak to the media, told The Washington Post that the parties reached a final agreement early Friday for the first phase of the ceasefire after hours of negotiations.

If implemented Sunday, the deal would bring relief to a battered and hungry population in Gaza, as well as to the captives taken from Israel and held in the enclave for more than 15 months.

The agreement is expected to start with a 42-day ceasefire in which the Israeli military would withdraw from some areas of Gaza , accompanied by a surge of aid into the Gaza Strip, as well as an exchange of Israeli hostages held by Hamas for Palestinians held in Israeli prisons, according to President Joe Biden.

The next phase, which is still being negotiated, would bring the release of all hostages, a full Israeli withdrawal from Gaza and a permanent ceasefire, Biden said.

Here’s what else to know: In Gaza, celebrations were tempered by continuing Israeli airstrikes ahead of the deal’s commencement.

The spokesman for Gaza’s Civil Defense, Mahmoud Basal, said Thursday afternoon that at least 77 people have been killed and more than 250 wounded since the agreement was announced the previous evening, including 21 children and 25 women.

The first six weeks of the deal are expected to involve the release of 33 hostages including Americans Keith Siegel and Sagui Dekel-Chen, said a senior Biden administration official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity under rules set by the White House.

Days before leaving office, Biden again took credit for the ceasefire deal.

“The road to that deal was not easy,” Biden said Thursday at the Pentagon’s commander in chief farewell ceremony.

“Eight months ago, I laid down the elements of that deal.” Both he and President-elect Donald Trump have claimed credit for the ceasefire agreement in the 15-month conflict.

Trump has asserted that he was the motivating force for the agreement.

Biden has stressed that it was a plan he laid out in May that was ultimately accepted.

At least 46,778 people have been killed in Gaza and 110,453 injured during the war, according to the Gaza Health Ministry .

The ministry does not distinguish between civilians and combatants but says the majority of the dead are women and children.

Israeli officials say they believe 98 hostages remain in Gaza and that about 60 are still alive.

Israel estimates that about 1,200 people were killed in Hamas’s Oct.

7, 2023, attack, including more than 300 soldiers.

It says 405 soldiers have been killed in its military operation in Gaza.

Hazem Balousha in Toronto contributed to this report.

</CONTENT>
