<TITLE>Ceasefire deal delayed as Netanyahu bargains with far-right allies</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2025-01-16</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2025/01/16/gaza-ceasefire-hostage-deal-netanyahu/</URL>
<AUTHOR>Gerry Shih, Shira Rubin</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
Israel's proposed ceasefire deal with Hamas has been delayed due to internal political negotiations.
-  Prime Minister Netanyahu is facing opposition from far-right coalition members like Ben Gvir and Smotrich, who demand a continuation of hostilities.
-  These hardliners threaten to withdraw from the coalition if the ceasefire is ratified, jeopardizing Netanyahu's government.
-  The deal, which involves a hostage exchange and prisoner release, is opposed by these figures who argue it's premature and dangerous.
-  Netanyahu reportedly has the votes to pass the ceasefire initially, but the potential for a resumption of conflict once the initial 42-day phase ends is high, due to the ongoing disagreements.
-  The ceasefire's fate hinges on these internal Israeli political disputes, with a crucial vote now delayed.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- The developments served as a stark reminder that even though the hard bargaining over a ceasefire has been conducted in Qatar with the help of U.S., Qatari and Egyptian mediators, the fate of the truce — and the question of how long it will hold — may hinge on talks taking place among a small group of political leaders on the Israeli right wing.
- Late Thursday, National Security Minister Itamar Ben Gvir, the leader of the Jewish Power party, vowed that he would withdraw from the governing coalition if the ceasefire is ratified, as is widely expected in the coming days.
- Ben Gvir added that he would consider rejoining the government if the war resumes.
- Another key Netanyahu ally, Finance Minister Bezalel Smotrich, said Wednesday that his Religious Zionism party would remain in Netanyahu’s government — but on the condition that the war would resume “with great strength, on a full scale, and in a new form, until we achieve complete victory.” On Thursday, the party issued a statement demanding that Netanyahu “ensures a return to war to destroy Hamas … followed by a change in the approach to achieving a victory immediately after the first phase of the deal as a condition for the party’s continued participation in the government and coalition.” Smotrich and Ben Gvir have argued that the ceasefire is dangerous and would see the release of hundreds of Palestinian militants to Gaza before Israel has had the chance to eliminate the group’s presence in the enclave.
- Moreover, they say, withdrawing troops now as part of the accord would foreclose the prospect of Israel occupying the territory over the long term, an aim they have championed for months.

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
correction A previous version of this article incorrectly said the ceasefire deal between Israel and Hamas requires approval from the Israeli parliament.

On the Israeli side, the deal requires approval from the security cabinet and the full cabinet.

The story has been corrected.

JERUSALEM — The Israeli government delayed Thursday a crucial vote on its proposed ceasefire deal with Hamas as Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu remained locked in difficult negotiations with far-right members of his own coalition who have been pressing for further hostilities.

Even as Israeli officials sought to work out remaining differences with Hamas and clear the way for an exchange of hostages held in Gaza and prisoners detained in Israel, some of Netanyahu’s own allies decried the agreement as premature, threatening to quit his coalition and bring down the government.

A vote by the Israeli cabinet that had been scheduled for Thursday will now come no sooner than Friday.

The developments served as a stark reminder that even though the hard bargaining over a ceasefire has been conducted in Qatar with the help of U.S., Qatari and Egyptian mediators, the fate of the truce — and the question of how long it will hold — may hinge on talks taking place among a small group of political leaders on the Israeli right wing.

Late Thursday, National Security Minister Itamar Ben Gvir, the leader of the Jewish Power party, vowed that he would withdraw from the governing coalition if the ceasefire is ratified, as is widely expected in the coming days.

Ben Gvir added that he would consider rejoining the government if the war resumes.

Another key Netanyahu ally, Finance Minister Bezalel Smotrich, said Wednesday that his Religious Zionism party would remain in Netanyahu’s government — but on the condition that the war would resume “with great strength, on a full scale, and in a new form, until we achieve complete victory.” On Thursday, the party issued a statement demanding that Netanyahu “ensures a return to war to destroy Hamas … followed by a change in the approach to achieving a victory immediately after the first phase of the deal as a condition for the party’s continued participation in the government and coalition.” Smotrich and Ben Gvir have argued that the ceasefire is dangerous and would see the release of hundreds of Palestinian militants to Gaza before Israel has had the chance to eliminate the group’s presence in the enclave.

Moreover, they say, withdrawing troops now as part of the accord would foreclose the prospect of Israel occupying the territory over the long term, an aim they have championed for months.

For now, Netanyahu has enough votes to push the ceasefire, which is supported by most of the Israeli public, through his 11-member war cabinet and the wider government.

And he would keep his grip on the governing coalition as long as no more than one of the right-wing parties quits.

But Netanyahu’s efforts to placate the challengers on his right flank may heighten the likelihood of war restarting once the initial 42-day phase of the ceasefire expires, Israeli officials and analysts say.

Behind closed doors, Netanyahu has been promising his far-right allies that the war could resume after that initial phase, during which Hamas is to gradually release 33 hostages in exchange for the freeing of more than 1,000 Palestinian prisoners, according to three people familiar with the negotiations.

Under the agreement, a second phase of the ceasefire is supposed to be negotiated during the initial phase and would require an Israeli withdrawal from Gaza.

If the ceasefire breaks down before then, nearly half of the hostages held by Hamas, many of them Israeli soldiers, would remain in captivity.

Gayil Talshir, a political scientist from Hebrew University who is familiar with the negotiations in Israel’s parliament, the Knesset, said Netanyahu focused his efforts in recent days on persuading Smotrich to stay.

Smotrich holds a special position in the Defense Ministry and is in control of a government agency that oversees policy in Gaza and the West Bank.

Talshir said Netanyahu has feared alienating Smotrich, who represents a small but politically critical base.

“In the eyes of Netanyahu, [Smotrich] is the mightiest because he could bring down the coalition, and so Netanyahu is promising to Smotrich and Ben Gvir that Israel will return to war after the first phase,” Talshir said.

“More importantly, he has made promises about Israeli sovereignty in both the West Bank and ensuring a military takeover of humanitarian aid in Gaza.

That will mean that Israeli civilians need to enter Gaza, which is the beginning of Israeli occupation of Gaza.” Before the ceasefire deal was announced Wednesday, a senior Israeli official emphasized that the agreement for the first phase would not be a comprehensive peace deal but a “ceasefire, many weeks long.” Incoming Trump administration officials have also said they would back Netanyahu if he returned to fighting.

“We’ve made it very clear to the Israelis, and I want the people of Israel to hear me on this: If they need to go back in, we’re with them,” Michael Waltz, Trump’s designated national security adviser, said Wednesday on Fox News.

“If Hamas doesn’t live up to the terms of this agreement, we are with them.” Another line of argument that Netanyahu took with Smotrich was that they “need Trump on our side” if they want to pursue other parts of their agenda, said an Israeli official who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss the closed-door negotiations.

Trump has privately and publicly declared his wish to see Netanyahu and Hamas sign a ceasefire agreement before his Jan.

20 inauguration, a message that was repeated this week by Trump’s incoming Middle East envoy, Steve Witkoff, in Jerusalem.

Smotrich’s political base hopes it will receive Trump’s support to eventually annex the occupied West Bank and potentially pursue reoccupation of Gaza.

The idea of currying favor with Trump now by supporting the deal, the Israeli official said, gives “Smotrich a justification for staying in the government after Ben Gvir pushed him to leave.” In a speech he posted on X this week, Ben Gvir boasted that he had successfully blocked previous attempts to reach a ceasefire agreement by threatening to quit, but he said he would not be able to block it this time.

Instead, the Jewish Power party leader urged Smotrich to join him and topple Netanyahu’s government if he pushed the deal through.

After Ben Gvir threatened late Thursday to quit, Netanyahu’s Likud party warned that “anyone who dismantles a right-wing government will be remembered for eternity in disgrace.” The existing deal, Likud argued, “allows Israel to return to fighting, with U.S.

guarantees for the weapons and means of combat it needs … and achieve dramatic security gains that will ensure Israel’s security for generations.” Polling on Wednesday showed that 70 percent of Israelis support some kind of hostage deal with Hamas and that Netanyahu’s personal ratings will probably be boosted by the ceasefire.

But Dahlia Scheindlin, a political consultant and pollster in Tel Aviv, said that polls have shown that Smotrich’s popularity has waned among his supporters, and that if new elections are held, his Religious Zionism party may not win any seats in the Knesset.

Even so, Scheindlin said, it is possible that Smotrich and Ben Gvir may force the government’s collapse due to their profound ideological opposition to the ceasefire.

“Ever since this government was formed, each time the coalition shakes, it’s usually [Smotrich and Ben Gvir], and it’s always that same dilemma,” she said.

“Would they stay in because they want their power, or would they leave to express their extremely powerful religious fundamentalism?” While he tries to hold his government together, Netanyahu has recently been cobbling together other contingency plans.

He has made overtures to Benny Gantz, a centrist who left Netanyahu’s war cabinet in June, and Mansour Abbas, an Arab Israeli political kingmaker, said Talshir, the Hebrew University scholar.

While Netanyahu sought to sell the deal Thursday, the negotiations with Hamas also appeared to hit snags in Qatar.

Netanyahu’s cabinet, which was originally scheduled to meet at 11 a.m.

local time to ratify the ceasefire deal, did not convene and would not meet unless the differences were resolved, Israeli officials said.

They accused Hamas of “reneging” on previously agreed details about which Palestinian prisoners would be released in the exchange for Israeli hostages.

These officials also insisted that Israeli troops will remain in the strategic Philadelphi Corridor, which borders Egypt.

A version of the agreement supplied by Hamas earlier this week stipulated that Israel would gradually withdraw from the corridor.

In a message on social media, Hamas Political Bureau member Izzat al-Rishq said Hamas is committed to the ceasefire agreement, but he did not elaborate.

As negotiators debated final details, Israeli forces continued to pound Gaza.

Between late Wednesday, when the ceasefire was announced, and Thursday midday, Israeli strikes killed at least 77 people, including 25 women and 21 children, according to Mahmoud Basal, a spokesperson for Gaza’s Civil Defense.

Strikes were particularly heavy in and around Gaza City, where the majority of deaths occurred, Basal said.

During past ceasefires, Israeli bombardment often intensified in the days and hours being implementation.

The Israeli military said in a statement that it carried out strikes on “approximately 50 terror targets” and took “numerous steps” to avoid civilian harm.

Amit Segal, a right-wing political commentator, said Thursday’s delays in Doha were connected to Netanyahu’s talks with Smotrich, which were underway simultaneously.

Smotrich has asked for assurances from Netanyahu that Israel would tighten the flow of humanitarian aid flowing into Gaza and maintain a military presence within the territory, Segal said.

“Smotrich is saying, ‘If you want to keep the government, I want to have a voice to decide how it goes,’” Segal said.

“And that means resuming the war six weeks from now.” Miriam Berger and Lior Soroka in Tel Aviv and Karen DeYoung in Washington contributed to this report.

</CONTENT>
