<TITLE>As Venezuela detains Americans, their families are left in the dark</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2025-01-09</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2025/01/09/venezuela-maduro-american-prisoners/</URL>
<AUTHOR>Samantha Schmidt</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
At least 31 people, including at least three Americans, remain unaccounted for by the Venezuelan government after their detention following the July 28 presidential election.
-  Families of these detainees have received no information about their whereabouts, in some cases for months.
-  The Venezuelan government has accused at least two Americans, including David Estrella, of plotting violence against President Maduro.
-  Estrella was arrested on September 14th and has had no contact with his family since.
-  The U.S.
- government has requested information about the detained Americans, but has not received any notification or details from the Venezuelan authorities.
-  Human rights organizations are concerned about the enforced disappearances and lack of due process for those detained.
-  The situation highlights the severe limitations the U.S.
- faces in aiding its citizens in Venezuela.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- The government has not disclosed their identities or their whereabouts, and human rights organizations have not corroborated the arrests.
- One of the Americans detained since the election is David Estrella, a 64-year-old from the Bronx who works for pharmaceutical companies as a quality control operator.
- Estrella, a dual Ecuadorian citizen, crossed the border into Venezuela on Sept.
- 9 to visit friends, a family spokesperson said, speaking on the condition of anonymity out of security concerns.
- The next time his family heard anything about him was on Sept.
- 14, when Venezuela’s interior minister, Diosdado Cabello, announced his arrest on television.
- Venezuelan authorities accused Estrella and other detained Americans of a plot to kill Maduro.

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
Even in authoritarian Venezuela, where Nicolás Maduro’s government has made thousands of politically motivated arrests over the past decade, human rights activists said they have never seen anything like the current wave of disappearances.

At least 31 people detained by the government since the country’s July 28 presidential election remain unaccounted for, according to the Venezuelan human rights organization Foro Penal.

Their family members have received no information on their whereabouts — in some cases, for months.

The Maduro government said it has arrested at least nine U.S.

citizens since the widely discredited presidential election , and Foro Penal said it has been unable to identify the locations of at least three of those Americans.

In previous years, detainees went missing for only a few days before family members could identify where they were being held, said Alfredo Romero, executive director of Foro Penal.

Now, many detainees are cut off from all communication, prohibited from calling a lawyer or a family member.

“These are enforced disappearances, which are an extremely serious human rights violation,” said Juan Pappier, the Americas deputy director at Human Rights Watch.

“It leaves the detainees outside of any form of protection.” By the end of 2024, Foro Penal had recorded at least 1,794 political prisoners in Venezuela — the highest number in more than two decades.

On Tuesday, ahead of Maduro’s inauguration to a third term, his security forces arrested about a dozen people associated with the political opposition or with human rights organizations, including the son-in-law of opposition presidential candidate Edmundo González, whom the U.S.

and several other countries recognize as Venezuela’s president-elect.

Authorities also arrested Enrique Márquez, an opposition politician who ran against González and Maduro in the July 28 presidential election.

Maduro’s interior minister accused him of proposing a plan for González to take office on Jan.

10.

Maduro said this week his government had captured 125 “mercenaries” of several nationalities, including two Americans, since November, accusing them — without providing evidence — of attempting to carry out violence in the country.

The government has not disclosed their identities or their whereabouts, and human rights organizations have not corroborated the arrests.

One of the Americans detained since the election is David Estrella, a 64-year-old from the Bronx who works for pharmaceutical companies as a quality control operator.

Estrella, a dual Ecuadorian citizen, crossed the border into Venezuela on Sept.

9 to visit friends, a family spokesperson said, speaking on the condition of anonymity out of security concerns.

The next time his family heard anything about him was on Sept.

14, when Venezuela’s interior minister, Diosdado Cabello, announced his arrest on television.

Venezuelan authorities accused Estrella and other detained Americans of a plot to kill Maduro.

Estrella’s family has had no contact with him since and has received no information about where he might be held.

The U.S.

and Ecuadorian governments have been unable to locate him.

Venezuela’s Communications Ministry did not respond to a request for comment about foreign nationals detained in the country.

A State Department spokesperson said that while the U.S.

government has requested information about citizens detained in Venezuela, the Maduro government has not provided any notifications about the arrests.

U.S.

officials are gathering more information, but their ability to assist U.S.

citizens in Venezuela is “severely constrained,” the spokesperson said, speaking on the condition of anonymity because of department rules.

“He has not been able to contact us in three months and we have not been able to have a lawyer meet with him,” Elvia Margarita Macias, Estrella’s former wife, said in a statement.

“We believe he is being held solely because he is an American and we want the U.S.

government to engage with the Venezuelan government to get him home to us.” Pappier at Human Rights Watch compared the disappearances to those of the dictatorships in Argentina and Chile in the 1970s and 1980s.

“There’s no effort whatsoever to pretend that he’s operating under the guise of legality,” Pappier said.

“It’s just brutal, systematic repression.” This week’s escalation comes as González, the opposition leader, is wrapping up an international tour — including a visit with President Joe Biden in the White House — to drum up support for the opposition ahead of Friday’s inauguration.

González has been living in exile in Spain for months but said he plans to enter Venezuela on Friday to take the oath of office.

It is unclear how he would be able to enter the country without being arrested.

Maduro has announced a $100,000 reward for information on Gonzalez’s whereabouts.

On Wednesday, Maduro faced a significant shift in international pressure: In part in response to the recent political arrests, the leftist president of neighboring Colombia, Gustavo Petro — who has been careful to walk a fine line with Maduro — announced he will not be attending Maduro’s inauguration.

Venezuela’s elections, he said, “were not free.” The Spanish government also declined to send a representative.

The opposition has called Venezuelans to take to the streets on Thursday to support their cause.

Maduro, meanwhile, has mobilized a vast military presence, ordering the integration of all security forces.

As Venezuelans prepare for the uncertain days ahead — and a potential renewed crackdown by Maduro — families of those detained have grown desperate for information.

Wilbert Joseph Castañeda Gomez, a 37-year-old father of four, called his ex-wife on Aug.

30 to tell her he had been detained in Venezuela.

Castañeda, a U.S.

sailor and former Navy SEAL with American and Mexican citizenship, was visiting a girlfriend in Venezuela, a close relative said, speaking on the condition of anonymity out of security concerns.

U.S.

officials have said he was in Venezuela on personal travel and not on official government business.

In the phone call with his ex-wife, Castañeda said he was in the notorious Helicoide prison.

His family has not heard from him since.

While human rights organizations have been unable to locate Americans like Castañeda, they suspect the U.S.

citizens — and other foreign nationals — are being held by the Venezuelan intelligence service, the military counterintelligence agency or in clandestine homes.

Some advocates say they could be in a prison know for its high-profile and political detainees, Rodeo I, in the state of Miranda.

The family members of some of those detained in Rodeo I said several foreign nationals are being held there; one described it as the “United Nations.” Detainees in Rodeo I are kept in prolonged periods of isolation, subjected to “particularly cruel and inhumane conditions,” such as lack of toilet paper and sleeping on concrete beds without mattresses or blankets, according to an open letter from several civil society organizations in June.

In interviews with The Washington Post, families of some inmates said they have been able to make brief visits to the prison, but prison authorities require them to be masked upon entry.

Inmates sleep in tiny cells, with only two minutes of daily access to water through a hose, several family members said.

Multiple family members said their relatives described being given medications that made them fall asleep.

One of the Venezuelan detainees in Rodeo I, a well-connected doctor and businessman, Cesar Omaña, managed to smuggle out a letter to The Post describing his conditions.

The letter was signed by him, with a fingerprint in blood.

He describes Rodeo 1 as a “concentration camp for political prisoners.” “I’m held in isolation and have no rights, no attorney, no phone calls,” wrote Omaña, a former Miami resident who was a key intermediary between the Venezuelan government and the opposition.

“I’ve been tortured, drugged and abused in many ways.

This is hell on earth.” Omaña, who previously lived in Miami and whose family members still live in the United States, helped organize a failed plot in 2019 to oust Maduro.

But because of his connections at high levels of government in Venezuela, he felt safe returning to the country in 2022, according to a family member, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because of security concerns.

Then, on July 30, shortly after the Venezuelan election, he was taken from his home by Maduro’s security forces, part of a crackdown by the government even against those who were previously considered protected.

“I know too much, and that makes me a danger,” Omaña wrote in the letter.

“Please help me.

I’m desperate.” Anthony Faiola contributed to this report.

</CONTENT>
