<TITLE>Here’s what we know about the Israel-Hamas ceasefire deal</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2025-01-14</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2025/01/14/israel-gaza-ceasefire-deal-negotiations-hamas-hostages/</URL>
<AUTHOR>Leo Sands, Abbie Cheeseman, Sammy Westfall, Karen DeYoung, Niha Masih</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
Israel and Hamas reached a ceasefire deal on January 14, 2025, mediated by the US, Egypt, and Qatar, after more than 15 months of conflict.
-  The three-phase agreement includes a 42-day ceasefire, the release of 33 hostages (including two Americans) in exchange for hundreds of Palestinian prisoners, and a phased Israeli withdrawal from Gaza.
-  Humanitarian aid is set to surge, with an anticipated increase to over 500 trucks per day.
-  Israel estimates 60 hostages remain, and negotiations for the next phase and full withdrawal will begin in coming weeks.
-  The deal also covers the return of Palestinian bodies and the eventual reconstruction of Gaza.
-  However, the deal requires ratification by Israel's government.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- (Video: Joe Snell/The Washington Post) What happens next? Hamas and Israel have been engaged for more than a year in negotiations, mediated by Qatar, Egypt and the United States.
- The existing plan is for three hostages to be the first released, a process that will take at least 48 to 72 hours and maybe longer to arrange, said a senior U.S.
- official Wednesday, speaking on the condition of anonymity to discuss the sensitive negotiations.
- Sticking points include how many and which hostages will be released and when, the number of Palestinian prisoners to be released and how many Israeli troops will remain in Gaza — for how long and where.
- Before the deal can be formally implemented, it needs to be approved by Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s 11-member inner cabinet and then the 34 ministers of his coalition Israeli government.

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
Hamas and Israel reached a ceasefire and hostage release deal Wednesday following more than 15 months of war that has laid waste to the Gaza Strip and divided Israelis.

Israel’s government needs to ratify the deal, which was mediated by the United States, Egypt and Qatar.

What are the terms of the deal? The first stage of the three-phase agreement includes a 42-day ceasefire, according to Qatar’s Foreign Ministry .

Thirty-three living hostages are set to be released over the course of that ceasefire, in exchange for the release of hundreds of Palestinians held in Israeli jails, according to U.S.

officials.

Two Americans — Keith Siegel and Sagui Dekel-Chen — are slated for release in the first phase, according to a senior administration official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity under rules set by the White House.

An Israeli official, speaking on the condition of anonymity to discuss negotiations, said Tuesday that the captives released in the first stage would be children, women, injured people and those 50 and older.

The first phase will also include a “withdrawal and redeployment of Israeli forces outside densely populated areas,” the Qatari ministry said.

Internally displaced people in Gaza will be allowed to return to their homes.

This period will also see a surge of much-needed humanitarian aid into the besieged enclave.

The volume of aid entering Gaza is supposed to reach more than 500 trucks per day during this period, State Department spokesman Matthew Miller said Wednesday — a more than sixfold increase over the average number in December.

Negotiations for the second phase of the deal — during which the remaining living hostages would be released and Israel would withdraw completely from Gaza — are supposed to begin in coming weeks.

According to The Washington Post’s tracker , Israel estimates that there are 60 living hostages remaining in Gaza.

Israeli forces will remain in a buffer zone along Gaza’s borders, Qatari Prime Minister Mohammed bin Abdulrahman Al Thani said in a news conference in Doha.

The extent of the Israeli military’s continued presence in the Netzarim Corridor, an east-west passage dividing the enclave, remained unclear.

During the third phase, Hamas would return the bodies of hostages who were killed and the reconstruction of Gaza would get underway.

Israel and Hamas agreed to a ceasefire and hostage release deal on Jan.

15, following more than 15 months of devastating war.

(Video: Joe Snell/The Washington Post) What happens next? Hamas and Israel have been engaged for more than a year in negotiations, mediated by Qatar, Egypt and the United States.

The existing plan is for three hostages to be the first released, a process that will take at least 48 to 72 hours and maybe longer to arrange, said a senior U.S.

official Wednesday, speaking on the condition of anonymity to discuss the sensitive negotiations.

Sticking points include how many and which hostages will be released and when, the number of Palestinian prisoners to be released and how many Israeli troops will remain in Gaza — for how long and where.

Before the deal can be formally implemented, it needs to be approved by Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s 11-member inner cabinet and then the 34 ministers of his coalition Israeli government.

Netanyahu faced criticism this week from his right-wing allies, including Finance Minister Bezalel Smotrich and National Security Minister Itamar Ben Gvir, who lambasted the agreement as a bad deal that spares Hamas from complete destruction.

Both threatened to withdraw from Netanyahu’s government, potentially forcing its collapse.

Still, Netanyahu is widely expected to have enough votes to push the deal through.

In addition, some Israeli families have threatened to file legal cases to block the ceasefire, saying it would release Palestinians who committed terrorist attacks against their relatives, but the Israeli Supreme Court is expected to dismiss the petitions, as it has in the past.

The process of arranging the release of hostages could take days, a senior U.S.

official said.

Following a pattern established in a hostage release in late 2023, the International Committee of the Red Cross is likely to escort the hostages from an agreed assembly point along a secured route, the U.S.

official said.

But the captives first have to be gathered and brought to that point, and the route established and cleared.

Gerry Shih and Lior Soroka contributed to this report.

</CONTENT>
