<TITLE>Senate to hold hearings on Trump picks as he prepares to take office</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2025-01-13</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2025/01/13/trump-administration-transition/</URL>
<AUTHOR>Sabrina Rodriguez, Brianna Tucker, Mariana Alfaro, Cat Zakrzewski, Ellie Silverman, Perry Stein, Philip Bump, Lisa Rein, Jacqueline Alemany, Marianna Sotomayor, Patrick Svitek, Jeremy Roebuck, Maxine Joselow, Meryl Kornfield, Lori Rozsa, Emily Davies, Michael Brice-Saddler, Petula Dvorak, Abigail Hauslohner, Liz Goodwin, Missy Ryan, Christian Shepherd, Katrina Northrop, Lyric Li, Adela Suliman, Shikha Subramaniam, Hannah Knowles, Jeff Stein, Andrew Ackerman</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
The Senate is holding confirmation hearings this week for several of President-elect Trump's cabinet picks, including Pete Hegseth for defense secretary, Pam Bondi for attorney general, and Marco Rubio for secretary of state.
-  President Joe Biden is wrapping up his term with appearances including a foreign policy address at the State Department.
-  Trump is slated to speak virtually at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, next week.
-  D.C.
- officials are anticipating over 200,000 inauguration visitors.
-  A special counsel's report on Hunter Biden was released, and the report addressed criticism that the cases were politically motivated.
-  A historically black college marching band will perform at the inauguration parade.
-  The Senate also advanced the Laken Riley Act, allowing detention of undocumented migrants accused of theft-related crimes, though Democrats are unsure of their amendment options.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- This is an excerpt from a full story.
- Analysis: Gearing up for a busy week of confirmation hearings Return to menu Confirmation hearings kick off this week for President-elect Donald Trump’s planned nominees as he prepares to return to the White House in days.
- Trump and his allies are pushing the Senate to act quickly on his appointments, and over a dozen will sit for hearings this week.
- Senate Republicans are mulling which ones they can confirm as soon as Trump takes office a week from now.
- This is an excerpt from a full story.

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
With President-elect Donald Trump returning to office next week, the Senate is set to hold confirmation hearings this week on many of his Cabinet picks, including Pete Hegseth for defense secretary, Pam Bondi for attorney general and Marco Rubio for secretary of state.

Meanwhile, President Joe Biden is making several appearances in his final week, including one at the State Department on Monday to deliver a foreign policy address.

Live coverage contributors 29 Return to menu President-elect Donald Trump is expected to speak virtually at the World Economic Forum, which convenes global leaders and executives next week in Davos, Switzerland, according to a person familiar with his plans who spoke on the condition of anonymity to describe private deliberations.

Discussion of Trump’s election victory is expected to dominate the conversation at the agenda-setting event.

Some of those picked to serve in Trump’s Cabinet are also expected to attend the conference in-person, the person said.

D.C.

prepares for more than 200,000 inauguration visitors — and protesters Return to menu Local and federal officials said Monday in their first publicly available estimates of inauguration attendance that they are preparing for about a quarter of a million people to gather in the nation’s capital as President-elect Donald Trump takes the oath of office next week.

This is an excerpt from a full story.

Hunter Biden special counsel defends inquiry, denounces Biden’s DOJ criticism Return to menu The special counsel who prosecuted President Joe Biden’s son Hunter defended his investigation in a report released Monday, pushing back on claims by the president and his family that the cases were politically motivated.

Attorney General Merrick Garland submitted special counsel David Weiss’s report to Congress on Monday afternoon and then released it to the public.

This is an excerpt from a full story.

HBCU marching band to perform at Trump inauguration Return to menu A historically black college marching band is scheduled to perform at Donald Trump’s inaugural parade next Monday, and its participation in the event has prompted mixed reactions online from university alumni and critics of the incoming president.

Mississippi Valley State University announced in December that it accepted an invitation to perform in the inauguration parade, which falls on Martin Luther King Jr.

Day, a federal holiday.

Return to menu The Senate just voted 82-10 to advance the Laken Riley Act, a measure that would allow federal authorities to detain undocumented migrants, including children, if they are accused of theft-related crimes.

Republicans have said they’re expecting amendments to be proposed, but Democrats told reporters Monday that it is unclear which amendments they’ll be allowed to offer.

Last week, nine Democrats voted against advancing the measure.

Both parties are expected to discuss the amendment process for the legislation Tuesday at their conference lunches.

Column: Republicans want concessions before California gets its tax dollars back Return to menu The wildfires that have obliterated entire Los Angeles neighborhoods are still burning.

But recovering from the disaster can’t wait.

The city and the state of California have thousands of homeless residents, and a need for resources already extends into the billions of dollars.

This is an excerpt from a full story.

Return to menu Sen.

Ted Budd (R-North Carolina) told reporters that Senate Majority Leader John Thune (R-South Dakota) mentioned he’ll have “some amendments coming up” to the Laken Riley Act, which the Senate is expected to consider this week.

The act would allow federal authorities to detain undocumented immigrants accused of theft-related crimes.

Confirmation hearing for VA pick postponed so FBI can finish background check Return to menu Tuesday’s scheduled confirmation hearing for Douglas A.

Collins, President-elect Donald Trump’s pick to lead Veterans Affairs, has been postponed until Jan.

21 to give the FBI more time to complete a background check on the former Georgia congressman.

Return to menu President Joe Biden is naming two new Gerald Ford-class nuclear-powered aircraft carriers after former presidents Bill Clinton and George W.

Bush.

In a statement, Biden said that, when he “personally delivered the news to Bill and George, they were deeply humbled.” “Each knows firsthand the weight of the responsibilities that come with being commander in chief,” Biden said.

“And both know well our duty to support the families and loved ones who wait and worry for the safe return of their service member.” In a statement, the White House said the future USS William J.

Clinton and the future USS George W.

Bush “will begin construction in the years ahead.” Elon Musk isn’t the only tech leader helping shape the Trump administration Return to menu During an intimate dinner at his New Jersey golf club last summer, President-elect Donald Trump told the prominent Silicon Valley investor Marc Andreessen that he wanted American tech companies to win a global race against China.

This is an excerpt from a full story.

Biden says he is leaving U.S.

with ‘more friends and stronger alliances’ Return to menu In his final speech to the State Department, President Joe Biden celebrated his administration’s signature policy accomplishments to reestablish the United States as a leader on the world stage.

House speaker says wildfire aid to California ‘should probably’ come with conditions Return to menu House Speaker Mike Johnson (R-Louisiana) told reporters Monday that he thinks wildfire aid to California should come with conditions, according to CNN .

“It appears to us that state and local leaders were derelict in their duties in many respects,” Johnson said outside of his Capitol Hill office.

“I think that there should probably be conditions on that aid.

That’s my personal view.

We’ll see what the consensus is.” Biden emphasizes U.S.

competition with China in final foreign policy speech Return to menu President Joe Biden delivered his final foreign policy address to officials at the State Department on Monday, making the case to viewers that his administration has strengthened U.S.

alliances and weakened foreign adversaries while balancing a fiercely competitive and strategic relationship with China.

Carrie Underwood to perform at Trump’s inauguration Return to menu Country music star Carrie Underwood will perform at President-elect Donald Trump’s inauguration next week, the singer’s publicist confirmed Monday.

“I love our country and am honored to have been asked to sing at the Inauguration and to be a small part of this historic event,” Underwood said in a statement shared with The Washington Post.

“I am humbled to answer the call at a time when we must all come together in the spirit of unity and looking to the future.” Beto O’Rourke explores run for Texas Democratic Party chair Return to menu Beto O’Rourke, the former Democratic congressman and presidential candidate and two-time candidate for statewide office in Texas, is exploring a potential campaign to chair the Texas Democratic Party and has been making calls to party activists about it over recent days, according to two people familiar with the outreach.

Cannon clears way to release Trump Jan 6.

report as early as Tuesday Return to menu Wp logo A federal judge in Florida has cleared the way for the release as early as Tuesday of special counsel Jack Smith’s final report on his investigations into alleged election interference by President-elect Donald Trump.

In an order Monday, U.S.

District Judge Aileen M.

Cannon said the Justice Department could proceed with plans to make public Smith’s findings detailing Trump’s alleged efforts to overturn Joe Biden’s victory in the 2020 election.

This is an excerpt from a full story.

Republicans postpone confirmation hearing for Trump’s Interior pick Return to menu Biden to highlight U.S.

alliances, policy achievements in final State Department address Return to menu National security adviser Jake Sullivan on Monday offered a preview of President Joe Biden’s final speech at the State Department later in the day, where Biden is expected to highlight his administration’s investment in foreign alliances and other policy achievements.

Biden’s foreign policy not the ‘central driving issue’ behind election result, Sullivan says Return to menu National security adviser Jake Sullivan told reporters Monday that he does not believe the Biden administration’s handling of foreign policy was “the central driving issue in the outcome of the election.” “The American people are complex beings,” he said.

“So we can think one thing about inflation and another thing about alliances, and a vote doesn’t mean that it’s a rejection of everything President Biden has done, by any stretch of the imagination.” Return to menu National security adviser Jake Sullivan said the administration is “close to a deal” to recover hostages held by Hamas.

“It can get done this week,” Sullivan said, noting that President Joe Biden spoke to Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu on Sunday and to Qatari Emir Tamim Hamad Al Thani earlier Monday.

Biden is scheduled to speak to Egyptian President Abdel Fatah El-Sisi later Monday, Sullivan added.

“I’m not making a promise or prediction, but it is there for the taking, and we are going to work to make it happen,” Sullivan said.

Column: Biden ends his administration with near Trump-level approval ratings Return to menu There were a few months when President Joe Biden and Democrats might have been justified in feeling confident about the trajectory of his administration.

He took office in January 2021 two weeks after rioters tried to keep Donald Trump in the White House, at a moment when deaths from the coronavirus were surging and pessimism ran high.

But then Trump slunk off to Mar-a-Lago, vaccines began to tamp down on infections, and the economy began to rebound.

This is an excerpt from a full story.

Return to menu Pam Bondi, the former Florida attorney general, was Donald Trump’s Plan B after his initial pick of former congressman Matt Gaetz (R-Florida) for attorney general flamed out.

While Bondi has gotten a less frosty reception in the Senate than Gaetz did, she is still likely to face tough questions about Trump’s campaign promises to seek retribution against his political opponents.

Her hearing will span two days to accommodate what will likely be extensive questioning.

DeSantis works to ‘mirror’ Trump on immigration by calling special session Return to menu Florida Gov.

Ron DeSantis (R) said Monday that he’s “been working with the transition team” of President-elect Donald Trump, leading him to call for a special session of the state legislature to crack down on illegal immigration ahead of what he called “a sea change” in policies from the new administration.

Return to menu In the place of raging counterdemonstrations that led to violence and sweeping arrests as President-elect Donald Trump first took office, National Park Service inquiries show this year’s permitted protests are expected to be smaller, and law enforcement officials have projected confidence in managing the crowds.

Authorities have so far left the National Mall largely open to the public — a departure from the inauguration of President Joe Biden, when the District was a fortress, reeling from the Jan.

6 , 2021, attack at the U.S.

Capitol.

Village People to perform for Trump at Turning Point’s inaugural eve ball Return to menu Charlie Kirk, the prominent conservative activist who helms Turning Point Action, announced that the musical group Village People will perform at a ball the group is hosting the night before President-elect Trump’s inauguration.

Kirk referred to the group as “one of President Trump’s personal favorites.” Village People’s iconic disco track “Y.M.C.A.” has been a staple at Trump’s campaign rallies throughout the years.

Conservative group starts $20 million effort to renew Trump tax cuts Return to menu The conservative group Americans for Prosperity announced Monday it is launching a $20 million campaign to support one of President-elect Donald Trump’s biggest priorities once he takes office in a week: renewing his 2017 tax cuts.

The Gulf of Mexico’s history of varying names extends well beyond Trump Return to menu Colonizers have always coveted the Gulf of Mexico: its trade winds, ports, fish and shellfish, its deep pockets of oil and gas far beneath a basin floor of crashed tectonic plates.

“This superb gulf belongs to us exclusively,” was the sprit of England’s imperial ambition back in 1797, according to a news report from the Negotiations at Lisle by a Scottish newspaper, which predicted that the British had their designs on harnessing the gulf’s trade winds.

That rapacious bravado has the same flavor as President-elect Donald Trump’s recent declaration that he’ll rename the Gulf of Mexico the “Gulf of America” because “it’s ours.” This is an excerpt from a full story.

Return to menu Pete Hegseth’s path to winning the defense secretary job depends in large part on how he weathers the blistering questions he will face during his confirmation hearing this week, with little hope of securing any Democratic votes and as several moderate Republicans have expressed concerns about his appointment.

From export controls to hacks, China signals it’s ready to take on Trump Return to menu With a burst of diplomatic and military moves, threats to restrict key exports and devastating cyberattacks on American networks, Beijing has in recent weeks broadcast that, unlike during Donald Trump’s first term, it is prepared to confront America’s next president head-on.

Since the U.S.

presidential election, China has revealed an extensive playbook of aggressive retaliatory trade measures to enact if Trump imposes additional tariffs on Chinese goods imported into the United States.

This is an excerpt from a full story.

Quiz: Do you know which promises Trump kept his first time in office? Return to menu President-elect Donald Trump has made sweeping promises on what he will do on “day one” of his presidency , including mass deportations of immigrants in the United States illegally, eliminating perks for electric vehicles and banning transgender women from certain sports.

Experts say many of his promises may be impractical to deliver on or in some cases illegal, but he could still push the law in his direction.

This is an excerpt from a full story.

Melania Trump plans to expand ‘Be Best’ campaign when back in White House Return to menu Incoming first lady Melania Trump is planning to expand “Be Best,” the initiative she launched during President-elect Donald Trump’s first term that focused on the well-being of children and raising awareness about online bullying, when she returns to the White House.

Activists, congressional Democrats launch new trans rights group Return to menu Advocates for transgender rights — including several members of Congress — are launching a political group to defend the community against attacks from both sides of the aisle.

The Christopher Street Project, a political action committee and nonprofit group, will use a “two-pronged strategy of fighting back against Republican anti-trans efforts and mobilizing voters against Democrats who cower to Republican tactics,” according to an announcement.

How Biden will spend part of his final week in office Return to menu President Joe Biden plans to deliver an address Monday on his foreign policy legacy as he starts his final week in office after a decades-long career in politics.

Pete Hegseth, Trump’s Pentagon pick, faces tough confirmation test Return to menu President-elect Donald Trump’s controversial nominee for defense secretary, Pete Hegseth, will appear for questioning Tuesday on Capitol Hill, in a public confirmation hearing that Democrats will use to interrogate him about his limited management experience, allegations of illicit and inappropriate conduct, and a long history of public commentary deriding women, minorities and people with opposing political views.

This is an excerpt from a full story.

A look at the schedule for Trump’s inaugural celebrations Return to menu President-elect Donald Trump will have a busy schedule the weekend before his inauguration and on Inauguration Day, with several events in the tradition of honoring the incoming president.

His weekend is scheduled to start with a reception and fireworks at his golf club in Sterling, Virginia, on Saturday, according to a schedule of events released Monday.

Also Saturday, there are plans for a reception for his incoming Cabinet picks and vice president’s dinner.

Protest crowd estimates down, ticket demand high for Trump inauguration Return to menu Applications for protest permits have been slow.

The hotline for tickets has been loud.

The run of show for this year’s presidential inauguration is by official estimations expected to be surprisingly routine for a city that has seen only high-drama or disrupted swearing-ins since President Barack Obama took the oath a second time more than a decade ago.

This is an excerpt from a full story.

DeSantis said to lean toward replacing Rubio with Florida attorney general Return to menu Florida Gov.

Ron DeSantis has been leaning toward replacing Sen.

Marco Rubio with state Attorney General Ashley Moody, according to people familiar with the matter, a move that could also pave the way for DeSantis’s chief of staff to become Florida’s top law enforcement officer.

DeSantis has not made a decision, according to a senior Florida government official and two other people familiar with the matter, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss internal deliberations.

This is an excerpt from a full story.

Analysis: Gearing up for a busy week of confirmation hearings Return to menu Confirmation hearings kick off this week for President-elect Donald Trump’s planned nominees as he prepares to return to the White House in days.

Trump and his allies are pushing the Senate to act quickly on his appointments, and over a dozen will sit for hearings this week.

Senate Republicans are mulling which ones they can confirm as soon as Trump takes office a week from now.

This is an excerpt from a full story.

Democrats warm to Laken Riley bill as Senate to take up measure Return to menu The Senate is expected this week to take up the Laken Riley bill, a measure that Republicans have championed as one of their first actions to address what they have deemed as necessary changes to immigration laws.

If passed, the legislation would require federal authorities to detain undocumented immigrants who are accused of, arrested or charged in cases of theft and related crimes.

The bill has newfound bipartisan momentum after the House overwhelmingly passed the proposal last week.

This is an excerpt from a full story.

Steve Bannon derides Elon Musk, vowing to limit influence over Trump Return to menu President-elect Donald Trump’s former chief strategist Stephen K.

Bannon is ramping up public attacks on billionaire Elon Musk amid an intensifying debate on the right about Musk’s influence in the incoming administration.

In an interview with the Italian newspaper Corriere della Sera this past week, Bannon said Musk “should go back to South Africa,” where he was born, and be denied privileged access to the West Wing.

This is an excerpt from a full story.

Trump’s treasury pick, Scott Bessent, to divest from assets Return to menu Hedge fund executive Scott Bessent, tapped to become President-elect Donald Trump’s treasury secretary, said he plans to divest from funds and other investments as he prepares to become the government’s top economic official.

Bessent’s plans were outlined in financial disclosures and an ethics agreement released Saturday by the Office of Government Ethics ahead of a confirmation hearing scheduled for Thursday before the Senate Finance Committee.

This is an excerpt from a full

</CONTENT>
