<TITLE>On Becoming a Boffinhack: The Research-Based Reporting (ReBaR) Framework for Concurrent Scientific and Journalistic Investigation</TITLE>
<PUBLISHED_DATE>2024-12-10</PUBLISHED_DATE>
<URL>https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/10755470241301066</URL>
<AUTHOR>Matthew D.  LaPlante</AUTHOR>

<SUMMARY>
This article introduces the Research-based Reporting (ReBaR) framework for concurrent scientific and journalistic investigation.
-  The framework aims to bridge the gap between science and journalism by enabling scientists to adopt journalistic storytelling techniques and journalists to engage in scientific research.
-  The ReBaR framework is illustrated through three case studies, demonstrating how this approach fosters symbiotic benefits in both scientific and journalistic processes.
-  The framework encourages collaborative, transparent investigation that results in publications across peer-reviewed journals and lay publications.
-  A key goal is to improve the accuracy and accessibility of scientific information through journalistic approaches.
-  The article emphasizes the complementary nature of scientific and journalistic pursuits in the quest for truth and objectivity.


</SUMMARY>
<HIGHLIGHTS>
- Described here through three recent experiences, the Research-based Reporting (ReBaR) framework for scientific storytelling is introduced as a model for concurrent journalistic and scientific investigation with publishing outcomes in peer-reviewed and lay press, and in which there are symbiotic benefits to both parts of the process.
- Get full access to this article View all access and purchase options for this article.
- Data availability statement Not applicable.
- References Amici C.
- M.
- (2015).
- Hidden iron: High tech devices in Roman imperial architecture.

</HIGHLIGHTS>
<CONTENT>
Abstract Scientific and journalistic investigations are complementary pursuits, involving a search for truth through the collection and analysis of evidence, good-faith endeavors of objectivity, and a commitment to transparency and reproducibility.

Yet scientists do not often embrace journalistic methods of storytelling, and journalists rarely engage in scientific research.

Described here through three recent experiences, the Research-based Reporting (ReBaR) framework for scientific storytelling is introduced as a model for concurrent journalistic and scientific investigation with publishing outcomes in peer-reviewed and lay press, and in which there are symbiotic benefits to both parts of the process.

Get full access to this article View all access and purchase options for this article.

Data availability statement Not applicable.

References Amici C.

M.

(2015).

Hidden iron: High tech devices in Roman imperial architecture.

In Proceedings of the 5th International Congress on Construction History (pp.

63–70).

CHSA.

Bednarek M., Caple H.

(2017).

The discourse of news values: How news organizations create newsworthiness .

Oxford University Press.

Boesman J., Costera Meijer I.

(2018).

Nothing but the facts? Exploring the discursive space for storytelling and truth-seeking in journalism.

Journalism Practice , 12(8), 997–1007.

Brüggemann M., Lörcher I., Walter S.

(2020).

Post-normal science communication: Exploring the blurring boundaries of science and journalism.

Journal of Science Communication , 19(3), A02.

Cameron C., Lee H.

Y., Anderson C.

B., Trachtenberg J., Chang S.

(2020).

The role of scientific communication in predicting science identity and research career intention.

PLOS ONE , 15(2), Article e0228197.

de Jong J., Hansen J., Groenewegen P.

(2019).

Why do we need for timeliness of research in decision-making? European Journal of Public Health , 29(Suppl.

4), ckz185–216.

Ginosar A., Zimmerman I., Tal T.

(2024).

Peripheral science journalism: Scientists and journalists dancing on the same floor.

Journalism Practice , 18(4), 918–937.

Hartz J., Chappell R.

(2005).

Worlds apart how the distance between science and journalism threatens Americas future .

First Amendment Center.

LaPlante M., Dahal P., Wang S., Hakala K., Mukherjee A.

(2024).

A “nuclear bomb” or Just “a joke”? Groundwater models may help communicate nuanced risks to the Great Salt Lake.

Water , 16(16), 2221.

LaPlante M., Dalanhese L., Deng L., Wang S.

(2024).

East Pacific ENSO offers early predictive signals for harvest yields.

Journal of Applied Meteorology and Climatology , 63(8), 909–919.

LaPlante M., Deng L., Dalanhese L., Wang S.

(2024).

Ocean temperatures do not account for a record-setting winter in the US West.

Atmosphere , 15(3), 284.

Peters H.

P.

(2013).

Gap between science and media revisited: Scientists as public communicators.

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110 (Suppl.

3), 14102–14109.

Stuivenvolt-Allen J., Simon Wang S.

Y., LaPlante M.

D., Yoon J.

H.

(2021).

Three western Pacific typhoons strengthened fire weather in the recent northwest US conflagration.

Geophysical Research Letters , 48(3), Article e2020GL091430.

Tumilty E., Pennel C., Bohn K., Hallmark C.

C., Croisant S.

(2024).

290 Are you trust-worthy: Trust-building activities in translational sciences.

Journal of Clinical and Translational Science, 8 (Suppl.

1), 89–89.

Biographies Matthew D.

LaPlante is a climate researcher, associate professor of journalism at Utah State University, and host of UnDisciplined on Utah Public Radio.

LaPlante is the author of Superlative: The Biology of Extremes and the co-author of multiple books on the intersections of science and society.

He holds a PhD in climate science from Utah State University, a master’s in online teaching from California State University East Bay, and a bachelor’s in liberal studies from Oregon State University.

Cite article Cite article 
 If you have citation software installed, you can download article citation data to the citation manager of your choice 
 Information, rights and permissions Information Published In Article first published online : December 10, 2024 Keywords science communication science journalism research-based reporting translational science Rights and permissions © The Author(s) 2024.

Request permissions for this article.

Data availability statement Data is available for this article.

View more information Authors Matthew D.

LaPlante Notes Matthew D.

LaPlante, Climate Scientist and Associate Professor of Journalism, Department of Journalism and Communication, Utah State University, 4805 Old Main, Logan, UT 84322-4805, USA.

Email: matthew.laplante@usu.edu Metrics and citations Metrics 
 
 Total views and downloads:
44 * Article usage tracking started in December 2016 
 
 Receive email alerts when this article is cited Web of Science: 0 Crossref: 0 
 Get access Get access If you have access to journal content via a personal subscription, university, library, employer or society, select from the options below: I am signed in as: View my profile Sign out I can access personal subscriptions, purchases, paired institutional access and free tools such as favourite journals, email alerts and saved searches.

Access journal content via a university, library or employer subscription.

Alternatively, view purchase options below: 
 Access journal content via a DeepDyve subscription or find out more about this option.


 
 More More

</CONTENT>
